<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
			<p>There was no one there quite so self-possessed as Elza. Even Rosemary had some difficulty in smothering a cry. The innkeeper jumped down from the seat as if he had been driven away by a whip; the peasants gesticulated and jabbered in an undertone. Rosemary looked at Elza and clutched her hand more tightly against her own body. Elza’s face was the colour of lead, her lips looked purple, even her large, blue eyes appeared colourless. Her hand was as cold as ice and shook in Rosemary’s strength-giving clasp. But to the eyes of all these peasants and subordinates she appeared perfectly calm, and after a moment or two she turned to the group of jabbering, gesticulating peasants and asked quite quietly:</p>
			<p>“Which of you first saw the motor draw up?”</p>
			<p>“I heard the noise, gracious countess,” the Jew volunteered, “as the car drew up outside the door, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And I saw the soldier jump down,” a young labourer broke in excitedly. “He ran⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Very well,” Elza said coldly. “Now you, and you,” she went on and pointed to the innkeeper and to the labourer, “come inside and tell me what you have seen. Will you come, too, darling?” she asked Rosemary.</p>
			<p>Finally she turned to her own man Feri:</p>
			<p>“One of you,” she said, “had better go to the gendarmerie. They ought to have been here by now.”</p>
			<p>Then she went into the inn; the Jew and the labourer followed, and the peasants, having looked their fill at the car, or else scared by that lifeless bundle in the chauffeur’s seat, crowded together in the doorway of the inn. But Rosemary lagged behind for a moment, examining the car as if she expected the huge, shabby thing to yield up the key of its own mystery. But in the body of the car there was nothing, except the cushions and the dust and the huddled figure of the dead chauffeur, with the head fallen forward on the breast, and the arm hanging over the side of the car. Rosemary turned away from it at first with a shudder, but almost despite her will her eyes turned back to gaze again at that huddled-up heap and the limp arm, from beneath the coat-sleeve of which a thin filet of blood trickled drop by drop to the ground.</p>
			<p>And suddenly something white and crisp fell from the lifeless hand into the dust at Rosemary’s feet. She stooped and picked it up. Fortunately the jabbering peasants were not looking this way, and Feri had walked off to the gendarmerie. What Rosemary had picked up was a letter addressed to “Lady Tarkington.” She tore open the envelope and read:</p>
			<p>“A very clumsy attempt, dear lady. As you see, it has led to no good. Your two protégés are now under my direct care, and you have little more than a fortnight in which to write the newspaper articles which I want.”</p>
			<p>The letter was signed “Naniescu.” Rosemary slipped it into the pocket of her gown, and then she went into the inn. The peasants all made way for her, and then crowded again in the doorway, trying to hear what was going on. Rosemary thought the long, low room one of the stuffiest and most evil-smelling places she had ever been in. It was very dark, the light only feebly penetrating through two tiny, impracticable windows, the panes of which were covered in dust. The only breath of fresh air that could possibly find its way in would have been through the door, but that was blocked now by a solid bundle of perspiring humanity. From the low raftered ceiling hung strings of onions and maize, and in a corner of the room, on a low table which was apparently used as a counter, were numerous bottles and a number of pewter mugs. The odour in the room was a mixture of dirt, onions and silvorium. But Elza, who sat beside the table with the innkeeper and the peasants before her, appeared quite unconscious of smells or dirt. She was questioning the labourer, who apparently was the only man who had actually witnessed the arrival of the motor-car into the village.</p>
			<p>“I saw it come, gracious countess,” he said, with obvious pride in his own importance, “and I saw it draw up outside here. There was a soldier sitting near the chauffeur.”</p>
			<p>“And he was in the driving seat?” Elza asked.</p>
			<p>“Yes, gracious countess, the soldier was driving when I first saw the car come along the road.”</p>
			<p>“And the other man?”</p>
			<p>“Well, gracious countess, I saw a sort of heaped-up bundle beside the chauffeur. I did not know there was another man.”</p>
			<p>“Well, then what happened?”</p>
			<p>“The car slowed down, gracious countess, and drew up outside here. Then the soldier jumped up; he stepped over the heaped-up bundle and got out of the car.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, and then?”</p>
			<p>“He took the thing which I thought was just a bundle covered with a military coat, and pushed it into the driver’s seat. After that he ran away as fast as he could.”</p>
			<p>“In which direction?”</p>
			<p>“Where he had come from, gracious countess. There was another car waiting for him there about half a kilometre away.”</p>
			<p>“Another car?”</p>
			<p>“Yes; I didn’t see it come, but I heard it slow down and come to a halt. The soldier ran all the way. He jumped into that other car, and it drove away in the direction of Cluj.”</p>
			<p>After that another man stepped in from the doorway and volunteered the information that he had seen the second car standing about half a kilometre away. He had seen the soldier running, and had seen the car drive off. He thought there was another soldier in that car.</p>
			<p>By that time a couple of gendarmes were on the scene. They were conducting their own investigations of the case in a casual, perfunctory manner. At first they took no notice of Elza or of Rosemary, talked over their heads in a proper democratic manner; then one of them asked curtly of Elza:</p>
			<p>“Did you see the car drive up?”</p>
			<p>Elza said: “No!”</p>
			<p>“Do you know anything about it?”</p>
			<p>Again she replied: “No!”</p>
			<p>Whereupon the man queried roughly: “Then what are you doing here?”</p>
			<p>Elza’s face flushed a little, but she replied quite courteously: “We all hoped at the castle to hear that the miller’s two sons had arrived safely at Hódmezö, and I thought that this was the car that drove them in the night.”</p>
			<p>The man gave a sneer and a shrug of the shoulders.</p>
			<p>“You seem mightily concerned,” he said, with a harsh laugh, “about the miller’s sons, to be out of your bed at this hour of the morning.”</p>
			<p>He spat on the ground, turned on his heel, and once more addressed the peasants.</p>
			<p>“Now, then,” he said, quite genially, “all of you get back to your homes. The Government will see about this affair, and it is no concern of anybody’s. Understood?”</p>
			<p>The two gendarmes waved their arms and drove the people out of the inn and away from the door as if they were a flock of sheep. They obeyed without murmur, only with an occasional shrug of the shoulders, as much as to say: “Well, well, these are strange times, to be sure! But it is no concern of ours.”</p>
			<p>The gendarmes then went out of the inn. They moved the body of the dead chauffeur into the body of the car; one of them got in beside it, the other took the driver’s seat, and the next moment the mysterious car had disappeared up the village street in the direction of the gendarmerie.</p>
			<p>When the last of the crowd had dispersed, Elza rose and, white-faced, wide-eyed, she turned to Rosemary.</p>
			<p>“There is nothing more,” she said, “that we can do here. Shall we go home?”</p>
			<p>She nodded to the Jew, and, leaning heavily on Rosemary’s arm, she went out into the street. It was past six now, and the village was flooded with sunlight. Elza’s tired, aching eyes blinked as she came out into the open. Rosemary would have put an arm round her to support her, for she felt that the poor woman was ready to swoon; but mutely and firmly Elza refused to be supported. Her pride would not allow her, even now, to show weakness in sight of these cottages, behind the windows of which the eyes of Roumanian peasants might be on the look-out for her.</p>
			<p>“They are outwardly obsequious,” she said, as if in answer to a mute remark from Rosemary. “Call me gracious countess and kiss my hand, but at heart they hate us all, and triumph in our humiliation.”</p>
			<p>Strange, wonderful people! Even at this hour of supreme anxiety and acute distress, pride of caste fought every outward expression of sorrow and conquered in the end. Elza walked through the village with a firm step and head held quite erect. It was only when she was inside the gates of her own home that she spoke, and even then her first thought was for her husband.</p>
			<p>“How to break the news to Maurus!” she murmured under her breath. “My God, how to break the news.”</p>
			<p>In the hall, where Rosemary saw that they were quite alone, she put her arms round Elza and drew her down into a low-cushioned seat.</p>
			<p>“Elza, darling,” she said gently, “have a real cry, it will do you good.”</p>
			<p>Elza shook her head.</p>
			<p>“It won’t bring Philip back,” she said dully, “nor Anna. Will it?”</p>
			<p>Her big, round eyes gazed with pathetic inquiry into Rosemary’s face. She seemed to have some sort of intuition that her English friend could help⁠—that she could do something for Philip, even now. Rosemary, her eyes swimming in tears, slowly shook her head. And with a low moan, Elza buried her face in the cushions, convulsive sobs shook her shoulders, and little cries of pain broke intermittently from her lips. Rosemary made no attempt to touch her. She let her cry on. Perhaps it was for the best. There was nobody about, and tears were sometimes a solace. The quietude, the stoicism of the past two hours, had been unnatural, racking alike to heart, nerves and brain. There was a limit to human endurance, and Elza had reached it at last.</p>
			<p>When the worst of the paroxysm was over, Rosemary suggested gently: “Would you like me to break the news to Maurus? I’ll do it most carefully, and I am afraid the strain would be too much for you.”</p>
			<p>But already Elza had struggled to her feet. She was wiping her eyes, then breathing on her handkerchief and dabbing them with it.</p>
			<p>“No, no, my dear,” she said between the dry, intermittent sobs that still shook her poor weary body, “not on any account. I understand Maurus. I know just what to say. Poor, poor Maurus! He has so little self-control. But I shall know what to say. You go and get your bath now, darling,” she went on, gently disengaging herself from Rosemary’s arms, “and get dressed. It will refresh you. I will do the same before I speak to Maurus. Rosa shall bring your coffee in half an hour. Will that do?”</p>
			<p>She forgot noting, thought of everything⁠—Rosemary’s bath, her breakfast, the guest. Ah, yes, the guests! Rosemary had forgotten all about them. It was long past six now; they would soon be up. All of them wanting breakfast, baths, attention. Elza forgot nothing. Thank God that she had so much to think about!</p>
			<p>“You go up, darling,” she said to Rosemary. “I shall be quite all right. Don’t worry about me.”</p>
			<p>One or two servants came through the hall, busy with their work. Elza had something to say, some order to give to all of them.</p>
			<p>“Tell the chef,” she said to Anton, “to come and speak to me here. And don’t go into the gracious count’s room until I call you.”</p>
			<p>Rosemary lingered in the hall a moment or two longer, until the chef, in immaculate white, tall linen cap in hand, came for his orders. Elza immediately entered into a long conversation with him on the subject of milk rolls for breakfast. And Rosemary at last went slowly up the stairs. Almost without knowing it, she found herself once more in her room, the pretty, old-fashioned room with the huge bedstead and the curtains embroidered in cross-stitch. How pretty it looked, and how peaceful! Through the open window came the sound of bird-song; a blackbird was whistling, a thrush was singing, a hundred sparrows were chirruping, and on the large lily leaves on the ornamental lake a frog was sitting croaking. So peaceful, so still! And, heavens above, what a tragedy within these walls!</p>
			<p>For a while Rosemary stood at the open window gazing out upon the beautiful panorama laid out before her, the prim, well-kept garden the flower borders, the shady park, and out, far away, the wooded heights, the forests of oak and pine which the morning sun had just tinted with gold.</p>
			<p>And with a sudden impulse Rosemary fell on her knees, just where she was, at the open window, and she stretched out her arms towards the Invisible, the Unattainable, the Almighty, and from her heart there came a cry, forced through her lips by the intensity of despair:</p>
			<p>“Oh God! My God! Tell me what to do!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
