<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h2>
			<p>The carriage which took Jasper to Cluj brought back Philip and Anna. After that the house was full of animation, like a beehive in May. Rosemary only saw the two young people for a moment. She felt a stranger in this family gathering, and her heart was so heavy that she soon found a pretext for going up to her room. Later on she pleaded a headache. Kind and hospitable as were these dear people, Rosemary felt that they must wish to be alone amongst themselves after the terrible time they had all gone through. They would have so much to talk over that the presence of a stranger, even so welcome as one as Rosemary Tarkington, must of necessity be irksome. It was clear to her from the first that Philip and Anna knew little, if anything, of the conditions attached to their release. Philip talked lightly of their being under surveillance for a time, and then added quite gaily that he would gladly lead the life of a hermit in Kis-Imre and never go outside the gates until the present clouds blew over. He gave himself up wholly to the joy of watching his mother’s happiness and seeing her dear eyes beaming on her returned boy. Altogether he was more like a schoolboy who by a fluke has escaped punishment than a man conscious of a deadly peril that had not ceased to threaten him.</p>
			<p>They all sat up talking late into the evening, and when Rosemary found herself at last alone in her room, trying to think things out before she went to bed, little Anna came up to her. The child looked hollow-eyed and grave; the joy that had been on her face when she first found herself in this second home of hers had all gone. She looked old, wan and tired out.</p>
			<p>Rosemary put out her arms, and Anna ran up to her and snuggled up close to her, just like a child. For a long time she was quite silent, with her head against her friend’s shoulder, her little thin hands held in Rosemary’s kind, firm grasp. Now and again a hot tear would fall on Rosemary’s hands. Anna was crying quietly to herself, and Rosemary waited until the girl was calm enough to speak.</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand the whole thing, Rosemary,” were the first words that Anna spoke.</p>
			<p>“What is it you don’t understand, dear?” Rosemary asked.</p>
			<p>“It is not like them to be lenient, is it?” the girl retorted, looking up with quick, eager inquiry into her friend’s face.</p>
			<p>“Oh, in this case,” Rosemary rejoined vaguely, “you are both so young!”</p>
			<p>Anna shook her head vigorously.</p>
			<p>“That wouldn’t worry them,” she said, “after all the trouble they must have taken to track us down.”</p>
			<p>“You were caught in the act, I suppose?” Rosemary queried.</p>
			<p>Anna nodded.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” she said. “And that was strange too. I had all my parcels ready⁠—the usual ones for Budapest, and Philip’s manuscript at the bottom of a box of vegetable seeds. Half a dozen soldiers and an officer came into the shop and walked straight up to the place where the parcels were stacked. They seemed to know all about everything, for the officer just ordered his men to undo all the parcels, and, of course, there was Philip’s manuscript.”</p>
			<p>“There is nothing strange in all that, Anna,” Rosemary said. “I have no doubt in my mind that you both have been watched for some time by secret service men, and at last they closed their trap on you.”</p>
			<p>But once more Anna shook her head.</p>
			<p>“I can’t explain what I mean,” she said, and puckered her fine straight brows together. “It is a kind of intuition that came to me when I saw those soldiers walk in. I am absolutely convinced that we were not denounced by regular Government spies. They are too clumsy, and we were too careful. I am certain,” she reiterated obstinately, “that we were not denounced by one of them.”</p>
			<p>“By whom, then?”</p>
			<p>“Ah, that I don’t know. It is an awful feeling I have. You know I never believed in all that so-called psychic nonsense which is so fashionable just now, but the feeling I have is not just an ordinary one. It is so strong that I cannot fight against it. It is a feeling that eyes⁠—eyes⁠—are always watching me and Philip⁠—cruel eyes⁠—eyes that wish us evil⁠—that <em>will</em> us to do something foolish, unconsidered, something that will get us again into trouble, and for good this time.”</p>
			<p>“You are overwrought, Anna dear,” Rosemary put in gently. “And no wonder! Of course, we all know that there are Government spies all over the place, and you and Philip will have to be doubly careful in the future’ but here in Kis-Imre you are among friends. Your aunt Elza’s servants are all of them Hungarian and thoroughly to be trusted.”</p>
			<p>Anna said nothing. She was staring straight out in front of her, as if trying to meet those mysterious eyes which were forever watching her. An involuntary cry of horror rose to Rosemary’s lips.</p>
			<p>“Anna!” she exclaimed, “you don’t think that I⁠—”</p>
			<p>But before she could complete her sentence Anna’s arms were round her.</p>
			<p>“Of course not. Of course not,” the girl murmured tenderly. “Rosemary darling, of course not!”</p>
			<p>“I never spoke about your affairs to a single soul, Anna,” Rosemary said gravely. “I give you my solemn word of honour that I never even mentioned the thing to my husband until after your arrest, when, of course, all the facts became public property.”</p>
			<p>“I know, Rosemary, I know,” Anna repeated. “I would trust you with every secret. I would trust you with my life⁠—with Philip’s life.”</p>
			<p>“And you did not trust anyone else?” Rosemary asked.</p>
			<p>“I never breathed a word about it to a living soul, except to you and Peter Blakeney.”</p>
			<p>“Peter knew?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Peter knew.”</p>
			<p>“You wrote to him?” Rosemary insisted. “Ah, then I understand. Your letters were held up by the censor, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No, I never wrote to Peter what Philip and I were doing; but you know he arrived in Cluj the day before I was arrested. He came to arrange some cricket match or other between Romanians and Hungarians. I don’t know anything about cricket, but, of course, Peter was full of it. He came to see me at my lodgings quite unexpectedly. I was so surprised to see him, and so happy, as I am very, very fond of Peter. We talked till late into the evening, and somehow I had to tell him everything. But except for that one talk with Peter, and the one I had with you, I never breathed a word about what Philip and I were doing, not to a living soul!”</p>
			<p>Rosemary said nothing for the moment. Indeed there was nothing much that she could say. Little Anna had got hold of the idea that some mysterious agency had been at work and brought about her and Philip’s arrest. But, after all, what did it matter? Professional spies or insidious traitor? What difference did it make in the end? Anna was frightened because she feared a fresh denunciation. She did not know that her poor life was already forfeit, that she was just a mouse whom the cat had allowed to run free for a moment or two, and that she would be pounced upon again unless her friend Rosemary whom she trusted with her whole soul, bought freedom and life for her.</p>
			<p>But it was not thoughts of Anna that sealed Rosemary’s lips at this moment and left her mute, motionless, like an insentient log, with Anna’s cold little hand held tightly in her own. Anna had not spoken of her activities or her plans to anyone except to Peter. And Jasper had extracted a promise from her, Rosemary, that she would not speak of Philip’s or Anna’s affairs to Peter. What connection was there between Jasper’s insistence and that other awful thought which, strive as she might, would haunt Rosemary’s brain like a hideous ghoul risen out of hell? What mystery lurked in the denunciation of these children, in their release, in the alternative which Naniescu had placed before her? What hidden powers were at work, threatening her with shame and the children with death?</p>
			<p>Rosemary felt stifled. Rising abruptly, she went to the window and stepped out on the balcony. The moon was up, a honey-coloured, waning moon that threw its cool, mysterious light on parkland and lake and the distant pine forest beyond. Immediately below the balcony a bed of tuberoses, with wax-like corollas that shimmered white and spectral, sent their intoxicating odour through the balmy air. And against the background of dense shrubberies a couple of fireflies gleamed and darted aimlessly, ceaselessly, in and out of the shadows. Rosemary, seeing them, was reminded of what Anna had said just now⁠—that eyes were forever looking at her, cruel eyes, eyes that were on the watch, spying, spying.</p>
			<p>Suddenly she clapped her hand to her mouth, smothering a sharp cry that had risen to her throat; and instinctively she stepped back into the room and hastily closed the window.</p>
			<p>“What is it, Rosemary darling?” Anna asked.</p>
			<p>“Nothing, dearie, nothing,” Rosemary replied quickly. “The smell of those tuberoses made me feel queer. That’s all.”</p>
			<p>She could not tell Anna that while she watched the fireflies, and the air was so still, so still that not a blade of grass shivered, and even the leaves of the aspen were at rest, she had perceived a tremor amongst the laurel bushes and seen some of the tall branches held back by a hand, each finger of which was outlined by the silvery light of the moon. And above the hand she had sensed a pair of eyes that were looking up at her.</p>
			<p>She tried to talk lightly with Anna, to infuse into her some of the buoyancy of mind which she was far from feeling herself. She was sure that Anna had a vague consciousness of the danger that hung over her and those she cared for; the only thing she could not know was that her fate and theirs lay in the hands of the friend whom she trusted. How would she⁠—how would they all⁠—bear the knowledge when it came to them, as come it must? How would she, Rosemary, face the reproach which, even if unspoken by them, would haunt her to the end of her life: “You might have saved us, if you would.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
