<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
			<p>Indeed no lyrical effusion would seem exaggerated if dedicated to Rosemary Fowkes. She was one of those women on whom Nature seemed to have showered every one of her most precious gifts. There are few words that could adequately express the peculiar character of her beauty. She was tall, and her figure was superb; had hair the colour of horse-chestnuts when first they fall out of their prickly green cases, and her skin was as delicately transparent as eggshell china; but Rosemary’s charm did not lie in the colour of her hair or the quality of her skin. It lay in something more undefinable. Perhaps it was in her eyes. Surely, surely it was in her eyes. People were wont to say they were “haunting,” like the eyes of a pixie or of a fairy. They were not blue, nor were they green or grey, but they were all three at times, according as Rosemary was pleased or amused or thoughtful; and when she was pleased or amused she would screw up those pixie eyes of hers, and three adorable little lines that were not wrinkles would form on each side of her nose, like those on the nose of a lion cub.</p>
			<p>Her chestnut-coloured hair lay in luscious waves over her forehead and round her perfectly shaped little head, and when she smiled her small white teeth would gleam through her full, parted lips.</p>
			<p>Eschewing the fantastic pierrot costumes of the hour, rosemary Fowkes was dressed in a magnificent Venetian gown of the fifteenth century, the rich crimson folds of which set off her stately figure as well as the radiant colouring of her skin and hair. She wore a peculiarly shaped velvet cap, the wings of which fastened under her chin, thus accentuating the perfect oval of the face and the exquisite contour of forehead and cheeks.</p>
			<p>“A woman so beautiful has no right to be clever,” General Naniescu remarked with an affected sigh. “It is not fair to the rest of her sex.”</p>
			<p>“Miss Fowkes is certainly very gifted,” Lady Orange remarked drily, her enthusiasm apparently being less keen on the subject of Rosemary than that of Miss Fairfax.</p>
			<p>“And who is the happy man,” <abbr>M.</abbr> de Kervoisin put in in his dry, ironic tone, “with whom the enchantress is dancing?”</p>
			<p>“Peter Blakeney,” Miss Fairfax replied curtly.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Qui ça</i>, Peter Blakeney?”</p>
			<p>“Peter Blakeney, Peter Blakeney! He does not know who is Peter Blakeney!” Lady Orange exclaimed, and for this supreme moment she departed from her habitual vagueness of attitude, whilst her glance became more markedly astonished than before.</p>
			<p>Two or three young people who sat at the back of the box tittered audibly, and gazed at the foreigner as if he were indeed an extraordinary specimen lately presented to the Zoo.</p>
			<p>“Remember, dear lady,” General Naniescu put in, wholly unperturbed by the sensation which his friend’s query had provoked, “that <abbr>M.</abbr> de Kervoisin and I are but strangers in your wonderful country, and that no doubt it is our want of knowledge of your language that causes us to seem ignorant of some of your greatest names in literature or the Arts.”</p>
			<p>“It is not a case of literature or the Arts, <i xml:lang="fr">mon cher</i> general,” Lady Orange condescended to explain. “Peter Blakeney is the finest cover-point England ever had.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! political sociology?” <abbr>M.</abbr> de Kervoisin queried blandly.</p>
			<p>“Political what?”</p>
			<p>“The Secret Points, no doubt you mean, dear lady?” the general went on, politely puzzled. “Advanced Communism, what? <abbr>M.</abbr> Blakeney is then a disciple of Lenin?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what you are talking about,” Lady Orange sighed. “Peter Blakeney is the finest cricketer Eton and Oxford have ever produced.”</p>
			<p>“Cricket!” exclaimed the general, while <abbr>M.</abbr> de Kervoisin uttered a significant “Ah!”</p>
			<p>There was a moment of quite uncomfortable silence. Naniescu was thoughtfully stroking his luxurious moustache, and a gentle, indulgent smile hovered round the thin lips of <abbr>M.</abbr> de Kervoisin.</p>
			<p>“It is interesting,” Naniescu said suavely after a moment or two, “to see two such world-famous people given over to the pleasure of the dance.”</p>
			<p>“They are excellent dancers, both of them,” Lady Orange assented placidly, even though she had a vague sense of uneasiness that the two foreigners were laughing surreptitiously at something or at her.</p>
			<p>“And we may suppose,” the general continued, “that a fine young man like <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blakeney has some other mission in life than the playing of cricket.”</p>
			<p>“He hasn’t time for anything else,” came in indignant protest from a young lady with shingled hair. “He plays for England, in Australia, South Africa, all over the world. Isn’t that good enough?”</p>
			<p>“More that enough, dear lady,” assented Naniescu with a bland smile. “Indeed, it were foolish to expect the greatest⁠—what did you call him?⁠—secret point to waste his time on other trifling matters.” “Cover-point, mon general,” Lady Orange suggested indulgently, whilst the young people at the back broke into uproarious mirth. “Cover-point, not secret.”</p>
			<p>“Peter Blakeney rowed two years in the ‘Varsity eights,’ ” one of the young people interposed, hot in the defence of a popular hero. Then he added with characteristic English shamefacedness when subjects of that sort are mentioned, “And he got a <abbr class="initialism">V.C.</abbr> in the war.”</p>
			<p>“He is a jolly fine chap, and ever so good-looking,” rejoined the pretty girl with the shingled hair. She shot a provocative glance in the direction of the two ignorant dagoes who had never even heard of Peter Blakeney, and then she added, “He couldn’t help being jolly and fine and all that, as he is the great-grandson⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No, kid, not the great-grandson,” broke in one of her friends.</p>
			<p>“Yes, the great-grandson,” the young girl insisted.</p>
			<p>There was a short and heated argument, while General Naniescu and <abbr>M.</abbr> de Kervoisin looked courteously puzzled. Then Miss Fairfax was appealed to.</p>
			<p>“Miss Fairfax, isn’t Peter Blakeney the great-grandson of the ‘Scarlet Pimpernel’?”</p>
			<p>And Miss Fairfax, who knew everything, settled the point.</p>
			<p>“Peter,” she said, “is the great-grandson of Jack Blakeney, who was known as the Little Pimpernel, and was the Scarlet Pimpernel’s eldest son. In face and in figure he is the image of that wonderful portrait by Romney of Sir Percy Blakeney.”</p>
			<p>“Hurrah for me!” exclaimed the one who had been right whilst the pretty girl with the shingled hair threw a glance at the handsome Romanian which conveyed an eloquent “So there!”</p>
			<p>General Naniescu shrugged amiably.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” he said, “now I understand. When one gets the youth of England on the subject of its Scarlet Pimpernel, one can only smile and hold one’s tongue.”</p>
			<p>“I think,” Miss Fairfax concluded, “that Peter is the best-looking and the best-dressed man in the hall tonight.”</p>
			<p>“You stab me to the heart, dear lady,” the general protested with mock chagrin, “though I am willing to admit that the descendant of your national hero has much of his mother’s good looks.”</p>
			<p>“Did you know <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blakeney, then?”</p>
			<p>“Only by sight and before her marriage. She was a Hungarian lady of title, Baroness Heves,” General Naniescu replied, with a shrug that had in it a vague suggestion of contempt. “I guessed that our young cricket player was her son from the way he wears the Hungarian national dress.”</p>
			<p>“I was wondering what that dress was,” Lady Orange remarked vaguely, thankful that the conversation had drifted back to a more equable atmosphere. “It is very picturesque and very becoming.”</p>
			<p>“And quite medieval and Asiatic, do you not think so, dear lady? The Hungarian aristocrats used to go to their Court dressed in that barbaric fashion in the years before the war.”</p>
			<p>“And very handsome they must have looked, judging by Peter Blakeney’s appearance tonight.”</p>
			<p>“I knew the mother, too,” Miss Fairfax remarked gently; “she was a dear.”</p>
			<p>“She is dead, then?” <abbr>M.</abbr> de Kervoisin asked.</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, some years ago, my dear friend,” the general replied. “It was a tragic story, I remember, but I have forgotten its details.”</p>
			<p>“No one ever knew it over here,” was Miss Fairfax’s somewhat terse comment, which seemed to suggest that further discussion on the subject would be unwelcome.</p>
			<p>General Naniescu, nevertheless, went on with an indifferent shrug and that same slightly contemptuous tone in his voice. “Hungarian women are most of them ill-balanced. But by your leave, gracious ladies, we will not trouble our heads any longer with that man, distinguished though his cricket-playing career may have been. To me he is chiefly interesting because he dances in perfect harmony with Venus Aphrodite.”</p>
			<p>“Whose Vulcan, I imagine, he would gladly be,” <abbr>M.</abbr> de Kervoisin remarked with a smile.</p>
			<p>“A desire shared probably by many, or is the one and only Vulcan already found?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, in the person of Lord Tarkington,” Miss Fairfax replied.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Qui ça</i> Lord Tarkington?” the general queried again.</p>
			<p>“You are determined to know everything, <i xml:lang="fr">mon cher</i> general,” Lady Orange retorted playfully.</p>
			<p>“Ah, but Mademoiselle Fairfax is such a wonderful encyclopedia of social science, and since my attention has been purposefully drawn to Aphrodite, my curiosity with regard to Vulcan must be satisfied. Mademoiselle, I beg you to tell me all about him.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” Julia Fairfax resumed good-humouredly, “all I can tell you is that Jasper Tarkington is one of the few rich peers left in England; and this is all the more remarkable as his uncle, the late Lord Tarkington, was one of the poorest. Nobody seems to know where Jasper got his money. I believe that he practically owns one of the most prosperous seaside towns on the South Coast. I forget which. Anyway, he is in a position to give Rosemary just what she wants and everything that she craves for, except perhaps⁠—”</p>
			<p>Miss Fairfax paused and shrugged her thin shoulders. Taunted by General Naniescu, she refused to complete the sentence she had so tantalizingly left half spoken.</p>
			<p>“Lord Tarkington is a great friend of your country, General Naniescu,” she said abruptly. “Surely you must know him?”</p>
			<p>“Tarkington?” the general mused. “Tarkington? I ought to remember, but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“He was correspondent for the Daily Post at the time that your troops marched into Hungary in 1919.”</p>
			<p>“Surely you are mistaken, dear lady. Tarkington? I am sure I should remember the name. My poor misjudged country has so few friends in England I should not be likely to forget.”</p>
			<p>“Lord Tarkington only came into the title on the death of his uncle a year ago,” Lady Orange condescended to explain.</p>
			<p>“And he was called something else before that,” the general sighed affectedly. “Ah, your English titles! Another difficulty we poor foreigners encounter when we come to your wonderful country. I knew once an English gentleman who used to come to Roumania to shoot with a friend of mine. He came four times in four years and every time he had a different name.”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Delicieux!</i>” Lady Orange murmured, feeling that in this statement the Romanian general was paying an unconscious tribute to the English aristocracy. “Do tell me who it was, <i xml:lang="fr">mon cher</i> general .”</p>
			<p>“I cannot exactly tell you who he was, kind lady. When first I knew the gentleman he was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Oldemarsh. Then somebody died and he became Lord Henly Oldemarsh. The following year somebody else died and he was Viscount Rawcliffe, and when last I saw him he was the Marquis of Barchester. Since then I have lost sight of him, but I have no doubt that when I see him he will have changed his name again.”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Vous etes vraiment delicieux, mon cher</i>,” Lady Orange exclaimed, more convinced than ever that there was only one aristocracy in the whole of Europe, and that was the English. “No wonder you were puzzled.”</p>
			<p>She would have liked to have entered on a long dissertation on a subject which interested her more than any other⁠—a dissertation which would have embraced the Domesday Book and the entire feudal system; but Naniescu and Miss Fairfax were once more discussing Rosemary Fowkes and her fiancé.</p>
			<p>“I suppose,” the Romanian was saying, “that Lord Tarkington has given up journalism altogether now?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” Miss Fairfax replied. “Lord Tarkington never talks about himself. But Rosemary will never give up her work. She may be in love with Jasper for the moment, but she is permanently enamoured of power, of social and political power, which her clever pen will always secure for her, in a greater degree even than Tarkington’s wealth and position.”</p>
			<p>“Power?” the general said thoughtfully. “Ah, yes. The writer of those articles in the International Review can lay just claim to political power. They did my unfortunate country a good deal of harm at that time, for they appeared as a part of that insidious propaganda which we are too proud, and alas! also too poor, to combat adequately. Over here in England people do not appear to understand how difficult it is to subdue a set of rebellious, arrogant people like the Hungarians, who don’t seem to have realized yet that they have lost the war.”</p>
			<p>Lady Orange gave a little scream of horror.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Pour l’amour de Dieu</i>,” she exclaimed, “keep away from politics, <i xml:lang="fr">mon cher</i> general.”</p>
			<p>“A thousand pardons, gracious friend,” he retorted meekly, “the sight of that lovely lady who did my poor country so much harm brought words to my tongue which should have remained unspoken in your presence.”</p>
			<p>“I expect you would be interested to meet Rosemary,” said the practical Miss Fairfax, with her slightly malicious smile. “You might convert her, you know.”</p>
			<p>“My only wish would be,” General Naniescu replied with obvious sincerity, “to make her see the truth. It would indeed be an honour to pay my devoirs to the lovely ‘Uno’.”</p>
			<p>“I can arrange that for you easily enough,” rejoined Lady Orange.</p>
			<p>She leaned over the edge of the box, and with that playful gesture which seemed habitual to her she tapped with her fan the shoulder of a man who was standing just below, talking to a friend.</p>
			<p>“When this dance is over, George,” she said to him, “tell Rosemary Fowkes to come into my box.”</p>
			<p>“Tell her that a distinguished Romanian desires to lay his homage at her feet,” Miss Fairfax added bluntly.</p>
			<p>“Do you think Sir George will prevail on the divinity?” the general asked eagerly.</p>
			<p>Just then the dance was over, the coloured musicians ceased to bawl, and there was a general movement and confusion down below through which Sir George Orange, ever obedient to his wife’s commands could be seen vainly striving to find a beautiful needle in a tumbled and unruly haystack. He came back to the side of his wife’s box after a while.</p>
			<p>“I can’t find her,” he said apologetically. “She has probably gone to get an ice or something. Tarkington was also looking for her.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Lady Orange placidly, turning her surprised gaze on General Naniescu, “suppose you and <abbr>M.</abbr> de Kervoisin take us up to supper in the meanwhile. We’ll capture Rosemary later, I promise you.”</p>
			<p>The party in the box broke up. The young people went downstairs to dance whilst the two foreigners gallantly escorted the elderly ladies up innumerable flights of stairs to a cold and cheerless upper story, where an exceedingly indigestible supper washed down with salad dressing and coloured soda-water was served to Pierrots, Marie Antoinettes, Indian squaws, and others who crowded round the tables and fought eagerly for unwashed forks and glasses of doubtful cleanliness.</p>
			<p>The Five Arts’ Ball was indeed a huge success.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
