<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-43" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h2>
			<p>Rosemary was the first to remember that time was slipping by. She looked at her watch. It was past ten o’clock⁠—over an hour since Peter had asked her to try to forget. She rose briskly to her feet, and arm in arm, like two good comrades, she and Jasper made their way together towards the château. When they came in sight of the great gates⁠—a couple of hundred yards still ahead of them⁠—Rosemary was the first to spy a motorcar standing there, and some half-dozen persons in the act of getting into the car. There were two sentries at the gates, and seemingly a few people on the other side.</p>
			<p>“It looks like a man and a woman and three soldiers in uniform getting into that car,” Rosemary remarked casually. And immediately, for no apparent reason, Jasper started to walk along more rapidly; a few seconds later he almost broke into a run. At that moment the car started off, and was soon lost to sight in a cloud of dust. Rosemary thought that she heard Jasper utter a savage oath.</p>
			<p>“Is anything wrong?” she asked. But he did not answer, only hurried along so quickly that she was not able to keep up with him. He had passed through the gates when she reached them, and when she tried to follow she was stopped by the sentry. She called to Jasper, who apparently did not hear; pointing to him, she explained to the man on duty that she was that gentleman’s wife, and if he was allowed to go in, why not she? They were as mute as if she had spoken in an unknown tongue, but they would not allow her to pass. In the meanwhile Jasper had disappeared inside the château. Rosemary had seen him go in by the main entrance, challenged by the sentry on guard at the door, but after a second or two allowed to pass freely in.</p>
			<p>Fortunately she was provided with money, and her experience of this part of the world was that most things could be accomplished with the aid of baksheesh. A young officer was crossing the courtyard; he looked in the direction of the gates, saw an excessively pretty woman standing there, and, true to his race and upbringing, came at once to see if he could enter into conversation with her. Very politely he explained to her that no one was allowed to enter the château, or to visit any of the prisoners, without a special permit from the commanding officer.</p>
			<p>Rosemary told him that she desired to speak with the commanding officer. This also, it seems, was impossible. But a hint from Rosemary as to reward if the matter could be managed simplified matters a great deal.</p>
			<p>The young officer conducted her across the courtyard and into the château. It had been a fine place once, not unlike Kis-Imre in architecture, but its occupation by the military had stripped it of every charm. There were not carpets on the floors, and only very rough furniture in the way of chairs and tables in what had obviously been at one time a cosy lounge hall. The officer led the way through a couple of equally bare rooms en enfilade, and came to a halt outside a door which bore roughly chalked upon the finely carved and decorated panels the legend: “Major Buriecha. Private. No admittance.” He offered one of the rough chairs rather shamefacedly to Rosemary, and said: “Major Buriecha will becoming through here presently. Will you wait, gracious lady? You will be sure to see him. I am afraid,” the young man added, with a pleasant smile, “that it is the best I can do.”</p>
			<p>“Couldn’t you announce me?” Rosemary asked. “I am Lady Tarkington. I am sure Major Buriecha would not refuse to see me.”</p>
			<p>The officer’s smile became self-deprecating. “It is more that I should dare to do, milady,” he said. “The major is engaged in conversation with an important government official. I would even ask you kindly, when you see him, not to tell him that I brought you as far as here.”</p>
			<p>“I couldn’t do that, even if I wished, as I don’t know your name.”</p>
			<p>“Lieutenant Uriesu, at your service, milady.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose,” Rosemary went on, after a moment’s hesitation, “you couldn’t tell me what has become of my husband, Lord Tarkington. He went through the gates and entered the château, then I lost sight of him. But he seemed to be well known inside this place. Could you find out for me where he is?”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid not, milady,” the young officer replied politely. “I have not the honour of Lord Tarkington’s acquaintance.”</p>
			<p>He stood at attention, waiting for a moment or two to see if the English lady had any further questions she wished to ask; then as she remained silent, he saluted gravely and went out of the room, leaving Rosemary to bear her soul in patience, and to wonder what in the world had become of Jasper.</p>
			<p>At first only a confused murmur of voices came to her ears through the closed doors of Major Buriecha’s private room. But gradually one of those voices grew louder and louder, as if raised in anger; and Rosemary, astonished, recognized that it was Jasper speaking⁠—in French, and obviously with authority⁠—to Major Buriecha, the officer commanding!⁠ ⁠… What in the world⁠—?</p>
			<p>She heard some words quite distinctly:</p>
			<p>“You are a fool, Buriecha! No one but a fool could have been taken in like this.”</p>
			<p>And the voice that gave reply was humble, apologetic, decidedly tremulous with fear. Rosemary could not distinguish what it said.</p>
			<p>Major Buriecha engaged in conversation with Jasper! And Jasper reprimanding him with obvious authority! What could it mean? At first she had only been puzzled, now a vague sense of uneasiness stirred in her heart. Uneasiness that almost partook of fear. With sudden impulse she rose and went to the door. Orders or no orders, she must know what was going on inside that room. Her hand was on the latch when she paused, listening. Was it mean to listen? Perhaps; but instinct was stronger than good conduct, and she had just heard Jasper’s harsh voice giving a curt command:</p>
			<p>“Get through to General Naniescu at once,” and then the click of the telephone receiver being lifted from its hook and the whir of the bell-handle. What could she do but listen? There was silence inside the private room now, but Rosemary could hear Jasper’s easily recognizable step pacing restlessly up and down. And one moment he paused quite close to the door, and Rosemary quickly drew back a step or two, ready to face him if he came. But he resumed his pacing and she her watch by the door. Presently she heard the other voice⁠—the major’s, presumably⁠—saying: “Is that you, Marghilo? Ask his Excellency the Governor to come to the telephone, will you?” There was a pause, then Buriecha spoke again: “Tell him it is Major Buriecha. And, I say, Marghilo, tell him it is very important and desperately urgent.”</p>
			<p>Again there was a pause, a long one this time. Jasper was still pacing up and down the room. Rosemary could picture him to herself, with his habitual stoop and his thin hands held behind his back. Once he laughed, his usual harsh, mirthless laugh. “You’ll get a fine dressing-down for this, my friend. I am thinking,” he said. “Naniescu won’t make light of it, I can tell you.”</p>
			<p>Silence once again. Then Jasper’s voice speaking into the telephone, and always in French: “Hallo! Hallo! Is that you, Naniescu? good! Number Ten speaking.”</p>
			<p>Number Ten! What⁠—? But there was no time to think, no time for puzzlement or fear. Jasper was speaking again.</p>
			<p>“Buriecha has bade a complete fool of himself. He has allowed young Imrey and the girl Heves to escape! Hallo! Did you hear me? It’s no use swearing like that, you’ll only break the telephone. Yes, they’ve gone, and you’ve got to get them back. Went by car half an hour ago, in the direction of Cluj, but probably making for the frontier⁠—what? Oh, a plot, of course, engineered by that damned Blakeney. No use cursing Buriecha; you are as much to blame as he is. Eh? Of course, for treating with that young devil behind my back! Yes, you⁠—Well, hold on and listen. Blakeney, I am sure it was he, came here with a forged order from you, demanding that Imrey and the girl shall be delivered to him for transference to an unknown destination. Eh? Well, of course he should have known, but he says your signature looked perfect; he thought it was all in order. The rascal was in officer’s uniform, and had two men with him also in uniform. What can you do? Telephone all along the roads to your frontier police, of course. If they stick to the car they are bound to be stopped. Yes, five persons⁠—three of the men in uniform, in an open car. The prisoners have probably taken on some disguise by now. Shoot at sight, of course, if the car does not slow down. Police the mountain paths as well. Blakeney can’t know them well. I don’t know who the other two men are. Hungarian, perhaps, or English. Don’t delay. Yes, yes! What’s that? Marghilo getting through? Good! Well, that’s the best you can do. We’ll have a reckoning presently, my friend. You should not have treated with him, I say. He has probably robbed your courier of the newspaper articles or else telegraphed in Uno’s name to The Times not to print them, and then got the prisoners out of your clutches by this impudent trick. Oh, all right. Hurry up! You have no time to waste, nor have I. Yes! All right. Come along if you want to. I shall be at Sót all right enough. But you won’t enjoy the interview, my friend, I promise you that. What?”</p>
			<p>Jasper had ceased speaking for some time, but Rosemary still stood beside the door⁠—a woman turned to stone. Her hands and feet were numb. She could not move; only from time to time a cold shudder travelled down her spine. She felt nothing, not even horror. It was all too stupendous even for horror. A cataclysm, a ball of fire, a flame that froze, ice that scorched. A topsy-turvydom that meant the kingdom of death.</p>
			<p>And Jasper, her husband, was on the other side of that door, Jasper Tarkington, her husband! The spy of an alien government, Number Ten! A thing! A rag torn and filthy. The man whose name she bore. She could hear his footstep in the next room, his mirthless laugh, his harsh voice muttering curses or else invectives against the other man, who was only a fool. Then suddenly the footsteps came to a halt. The door was pulled open and Rosemary stood face to face with Jasper.</p>
			<p>At sight of her he stood stock-still. An ashen hue spread over his face. The curse that had risen to his throat died before it reached his lips.</p>
			<p>From the room behind him Major Buriecha’s tremulous voice was asking if anything was amiss. Jasper closed the door and stood with his back to it, still facing Rosemary. His eyes, always hawk-like and closely set, had narrowed till they were mere slits, and his lips had curled up over his jaws, showing his teeth white and sharp, like those of a wolf. An expression of intense cruelty distorted his face. He was about to speak, but Rosemary put up her hand to stop him.</p>
			<p>“Not here,” she commanded. “Not now.”</p>
			<p>He gave a hard laugh and shrugged his shoulders.</p>
			<p>“It had to come some time, I suppose,” he said coolly. “I am not sorry.”</p>
			<p>“Nor I,” she replied. “But will you please go now? We’ll meet later⁠—in the hotel.”</p>
			<p>He looked her up and down with that glance which she had learned to dread, and for a moment it seemed as if he would yield to that ungovernable passion in him and seize her in his arms. Rosemary did not move. Her luminous eyes, abnormally dilated, never left his face for one instant. She watched the struggle in the man’s tortuous soul, the passion turned to hatred now that he stood revealed. She did not flinch, because she was not afraid. The man was too vile to inspire fear.</p>
			<p>“Go!” she said coldly.</p>
			<p>For another second he hesitated, but it was the banal sound of Buriecha spluttering and coughing on the other side of the door that clinched his resolve. This was neither the place nor the time to assert his will, to punish her for the humiliation which he was enduring. Once more he laughed and shrugged his shoulders, then he walked slowly out of the room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
