<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h2>
			<p>And it had been a wonderful day. The weather was perfect. Everyone was in the highest possible spirits. The chef surpassed himself; everyone pronounced the lobster à l’Américaine perfect and the Charlotte Russe Créole quite inimitable.</p>
			<p>All afternoon tennis balls were flying, and there was coffee, ices and iced drinks going all day on the lawn. At five o’clock the gipsy musicians from Bonczhida arrived, and after that music never ceased. Rosemary learned something of gipsy endurance that day, for this band of twelve musicians never left off playing from the moment they arrived until⁠—until midnight, when time ceased to be and Fate began to swing her long pendulum.</p>
			<p>But between five o’clock and midnight there was music, ceaseless music. While the guests arrived, while everyone played tennis, croquet, drank coffee, walked, flirted, dressed, dined and danced there was music⁠—music all the time.</p>
			<p>After dinner the young Romanian officers from the garrison at Cluj came over in several motors. Among them were the eleven cricketers, very proud of themselves, feeling quite English and real sportsmen, delighted to have been chosen to play in the historic match. Fine-looking young men, most of them, with the unmistakable swaggering air of the conqueror about their whole attitude towards the subject race. Elza was invariably a perfect hostess; but Maurus, after a curt greeting, nursed his wrath in a corner of the ballroom, surrounded by his own friends. He had been drilled to keep his temper in check, and love for his own son, anxiety for him and knowledge of danger gave him for this one evening a certain amount of self-control. Rosemary admired him as much as she did the others, for she knew what it cost Maurus to have these alien conquerors in his house.</p>
			<p>Anna’s mother and sister had come over from Ujlak. The mother was a hard woman, obviously selfish and unsympathetic. Her own grievances, the confiscation of a great deal of her property, seemed to have smothered every soft, womanly instinct in her. Apparently she knew nothing of the danger that hung over her daughter, and Rosemary had the feeling that if she had known she would not greatly have cared. Her eyes, which were dark and set very wide apart in a flat, colourless face, only softened once, and that was when she spoke about her husband, who had died just before the war.</p>
			<p>As for persecutions, humiliations, petty tyrannies, she dismissed them with a shrug of the shoulders. “The Romanians are the scum of the earth,” she said in her quiet, unemotional manner, through her thin, colourless lips, “just a horde of uneducated peasantry; you can’t expect anything from a pig but a grunt. I am only thankful that Béla is not here to see it all.”</p>
			<p>On the other hand, the young people who filled the stately château of Kis-Imre with their flutterings like an army of gaily painted butterflies did not worry about political grievances. For them the Romanian officers were just dancing-partners, and their worth was only measured by their proficiency in the latest steps. The mammas and papas either played bridge or sat on the chairs that were ranged against the walls all round the beautiful ballroom placidly admiring the evolutions of their own progeny.</p>
			<p>Rosemary, not to be outdone in self-discipline, was outwardly as gay as any of them. She danced impartially with the Hungarians and the Romanians, and talked cricket knowledgeably with the team. For her the atmosphere was electrical. At times it seemed to her overstrained senses as if she could hear the whir of the spinning-wheel driven by the Fates, the hum of the spindle, and the click of their scissors as they made ready to cut the thread of these people’s destiny.</p>
			<p>Just before midnight the young Romanian officers who formed the cricket team left in the two motorcars which were to take them direct to Hódmezö, a matter of ninety odd miles. Rosemary found herself saying goodbye to them like an automaton⁠—counting them over as if they were ninepins. A kind of mist was before her eyes through which their good-looking faces seemed to be grinning at her, and their moustaches bristling like Alice’s Cheshire cat.</p>
			<p>Elza, wonderful as ever, fussed around them, stuffing delicacies into the cars at the last moment, fruit, bottles of wine, cakes, chocolates, and lending them rugs and cushions.</p>
			<p>“It is a long drive,” she said, as she shook hands one by one with the young officers, who clicked their heels together, jingled their spurs and declared that they had had a very pleasant evening. “You will be hungry when you get to Hódmezö,” she added, “and all the restaurants will be closed. You will be glad of a glass of wine and some of my homemade cake.”</p>
			<p>Rosemary was standing next to Maurus Imrey at the time. She heard him mutter between his teeth:</p>
			<p>“And may it choke you when you eat and drink.”</p>
			<p>But even Maurus was wonderful. Wonderful! He shook hands. He smiled⁠—wryly; but he smiled. Wished them all Godspeed. He had been well drilled, and he was fully conscious of the danger to Philip and Anna if he lost control over his temper now.</p>
			<p>So he, too, gave directions for putting provisions into the cars. He had four bottles of French red wine in his cellar and he insisted that the young officers should have those. “It will make them play that silly cricket better,” he said. “And I hate the stuff myself.”</p>
			<p>The four men who were going with the team as servants were there arranging the rugs, stowing the wine and fruit and cake in the cars. Rosemary knew the two sons of János, the miller, by sight. They were fine, well-set-up young fellows, obviously of the stuff that heroes are made of, for they were going to risk their lives for the children of their feudal lords.</p>
			<p>Anna, equally self-possessed, flitted among the guests like a little fairy. She had on a pale blue dress, and out in the open her slim figure was hardly distinguishable in the gloom; only her small, white face told as if carved out of alabaster: that dear little face, with the big eyes that were so like Peter’s. When she was saying goodbye to one of the young officers, who had been her dancing-partner, she said with a pout:</p>
			<p>“I think it was horrid of you to telephone to Peter Blakeney yesterday and take him away from us. I don’t believe you would have had any difficulty with the hotel people about your rooms. And, anyway, you might have let Peter have another day’s enjoyment.”</p>
			<p>The young man appeared genuinely bewildered.</p>
			<p>“Will the gracious lady deign to explain?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Oh, there is nothing to explain,” Anna said, with a light laugh. “We were all of us very angry with you for sending that telephone message which took Peter Blakeney away from us.”</p>
			<p>“But pardon me, dear lady,” the officer rejoined, “we didn’t send any telephone message to Monsieur Blakeney. As a matter of fact, we fully expected to find him here.”</p>
			<p>“But about your rooms⁠—?” Anna insisted.</p>
			<p>“Our rooms at Hódmezö have been arranged for ages ago. Everything there is in perfect order and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Anna, dear,” Rosemary broke in quickly, “Peter didn’t say who sent him the telephone message. He only said that he had one. It may have come from Hódmezö⁠—from one of the hotel people⁠—he didn’t say⁠—”</p>
			<p>What had prompted Rosemary to interpose at this moment she did not know. It was just an instinct: the blind instinct to protect, to shield Peter from something ugly and vague, that she had not yet had time to see clearly, and Anna then went on lightly:</p>
			<p>“Oh, of course he didn’t say. Anyway, when you see Peter, tell him he was very silly to go away, and that he missed a great deal by not being here tonight. You can tell him that Marie never danced so well in all her life, and the gipsies from Bonczhida simply surpassed themselves.”</p>
			<p>Whereupon the young officer clicked his heels and promised that he would deliver the message.</p>
			<p>“But we shan’t see Monsieur Blakeney,” he said, “until the evening. You know the match is not until Thursday. Monsieur Blakeney arranged to meet us in Hódmezö on Wednesday evening, and this is only Tuesday.</p>
			<p>“It will be Wednesday morning before we start,” one of his friends broke in lightly, “if you don’t hurry, you old chatterbox.”</p>
			<p>After that, more “goodbyes” and waving of hands as the motorcars rounded the courtyard and finally swung out of the gates. Rosemary looked round to catch sight of Elza. She was quite placid, and on her dear, round face there was a set smile. Evidently she was unconscious of the fact that something stupendous had happened, something that had hit Rosemary like a blow from a sledgehammer. No, no! Elza had not noticed. Elza’s mind was no longer here. It was way out upon the dusty road, watching a motorcar travelling at full speed over the frontier away from this land of bondage, to Hungary to freedom. Elza had noticed nothing. Anna and Philip were still laughing and chattering, Maurus muttering curses. No one had noticed anything. Only for Rosemary had the world⁠—her own beautiful world of truth and loyalty⁠—come to an end. Peter had lied. Peter was playing a double game. It was no use arguing, no use hoping. The only thing to do was to go on groping in this mystery that deepened and deepened, until it became tangible, material like a thick, dark fog through which glided ghouls and demons who whispered and laughed. And they whispered and laughed because Peter had lied and because she, Rosemary, saw all her hopes, her faith, her ideals lying shattered in a tangled heap at her feet. Peter had lied. He had acted a lie. He told her that he had promised to go to Hódmezö to see about rooms for the cricket team. Well, that was not true. Rosemary had interposed, made some excuse for Peter. She wouldn’t have those Romanians think that Peter was a liar. They would have smiled, suggested some amorous intrigue which Monsieur Blakeney wished to keep dark. At the thought Rosemary’s gorge rose, and she put in a lame defence for Peter. But all the time she knew that he had lied. If Peter did not go to Hódmezö yesterday, where was he now? Why all this secrecy? These lies?</p>
			<p>Why? Oh, God, why?</p>
			<p>Rosemary had found a quiet corner in the hall where she could sit and think for a moment. Yet thinking was the one thing she could not do. Always, at every turn she was confronted with that hideous query: Why had Peter lied? After a while she had to give up trying to think. Fate’s spindle was whirring, the scissors clinking. She, Rosemary, a mere atom in the hands of Fate, must continue to play her part.</p>
			<p>A quarter of an hour must have gone by while she sat⁠—trying to think⁠—in the dark. Perhaps more. Anyway, when she returned to the ballroom she found the company much diminished in numbers. All the Romanian officers had gone, also one large party who lived just the other side of Cluj. Only a few remained whose châteaux were too far away for a midnight start, seeing that motors were forbidden to the conquered race. They were going to spend the night at Kis-Imre, and probably make a start in the morning. The young people had already resumed dancing; the gipsies were playing the latest foxtrot. The mammas and papas were placidly admiring their respective progeny.</p>
			<p>All this Rosemary took in at a glance.</p>
			<p>Then she looked round for Elza. But neither Elza nor Maurus was there. And Philip and Anna had also gone.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
