<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
			<p>A few minutes later Elza came back. To Rosemary, who had been watching for her by the door, she just whispered as she entered:</p>
			<p>“It is all right. They have gone.”</p>
			<p>She still was wonderful. Quite calm and with that set smile on her face. Only her round, blue eyes had an unusual glitter, and the pretty silvered hair clung matted against the smooth white brow. Rosemary watched the scene, now entranced. She had never seen anything like it. It did not seem reality at all. It could not be. All these people here were just puppets and they were play-acting. They could not have behaved as they did if they had been real.</p>
			<p>There were no longer any Roumanians there. They were all Hungarians together⁠—just a few of them, all from Transylvania, the wretched, occupied territory, in which everybody was something of a slave, never allowed to forget for an instant that they were the defeated, and that they must submit. All were relatives or else very intimate friends. And after a while they began to notice that Philip and Anna were not there. At first they asked questions. Where were Philip and Anna? Elza said nothing. She only gave an answering look here and there, a quiver of the eyelid and certain setting of the lips. She did not say anything, but it was remarkable how everybody understood.</p>
			<p>Rosemary watched every face and knew that they understood. They asked no more questions. They accepted the situation. Philip and Anna had gone. They had to go as countless others, who had to fly at dead of night, get the other side of the frontier as quickly as possible, to escape from military tribunal, chicanery, persecution, or even death.</p>
			<p>It was late now, long past midnight. The gipsies had been sent downstairs to get some supper. The mammas and papas declared that it was time to go to bed. The young people thanked dear Aunt Elza for such a happy time, the young men kissed her hand. One or two of the older people whispered: “Good luck!” Others said reassuringly: “Don’t fret, they will be all right.” Never a question about Philip and Anna. Never a comment. They knew. They understood.</p>
			<p>Orders were given for the carriages to be ready at nine o’clock the next morning. With the innate delicacy that underlay so much apparent pleasure-loving, they wished to relieve as soon as practicable this house of sorrow from the burden of their presence.</p>
			<p>By half-past twelve ballroom, hall, reception-rooms, were all empty. Elza waited downstairs till the last of the servants had gone. Rosemary helped her at the last to put the gold service away in the strong cupboard. It consisted of half a dozen pieces of great artistic beauty and equally great value. Each piece had to be wrapped up in cotton wool and green baize. Elza did it all, and Rosemary could see that her podgy white hands did not tremble, and that she put every piece away with her usual meticulous care. Only when her task was accomplished and there was nothing more to do but switch off the light did Elza’s stoicism give way. She sank into a chair, her head fell back against the cushions, and a leaden tint spread over her cheeks and lips. Rosemary quickly poured some brandy into a glass, and kneeling beside her tried to get her to drink some of it. To please her, Elza sipped a few drops. A wan smile spread over her face.</p>
			<p>“Don’t worry about me, Rosemary darling,” she said, “I am quite well.”</p>
			<p>She jumped up at once and added: “I must see how poor Maurus is.”</p>
			<p>“Come into my room afterwards,” Rosemary suggested, “and rest there on the sofa. I know you won’t sleep.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Elza replied, “I will come as soon as I can get Maurus to sleep. I think he may get to sleep presently. But I don’t think I shall. You see, we ought to get a telephone message through from Hódmezö the first thing in the morning. Philip and I agreed on a code. If everything is all right he is to give Peter Blakeney’s name and say that the weather is beautiful in Hungary, and every arrangement for the cricket match splendid. After I get that message I shall probably sleep.”</p>
			<p>She had toiled up the stairs while she was talking, and Rosemary followed close behind her, ready to catch her if she swooned.</p>
			<p>“I won’t say ‘good night’ now,” Elza said when she near her bedroom door. “You go to bed, Rosemary darling, and I will come in presently for a little talk when Maurus is asleep.”</p>
			<p>Rosemary went into her room. She undid her hair and slipped into a dressing-gown. It was no use going to bed; she knew she would not be able to go to sleep. It was just a case of waiting. Of watching, of praying, and commending those two young creatures to God. Watching and praying, with eyes fixed upon the hands of the clock, following in imagination every phase of to-nights adventures. Every detail. At this hour they would be at the mill, all the actors in the drama which poor Elza had invented. Philip and Anna would be there, changing into peasant’s clothes, and János the miller would be setting out the mugs and the spirit, which would make the Jew’s son and the brother of the Roumanian storekeeper blind to the world. Old Emma would be there too, the miller’s wife, the mother of the two boys who were going to risk so much for Philip’s sake and Anna’s Emma would be fussing round with cloth and duster. Grumbling and fussing. Knowing nothing of the drama on which the curtain would ring up in the parlour of her cottage, and in which her two sons would be playing leading roles. János would not have told her. He, the father, had agreed to it all; had even suggested it. But the mother? No! If she knew she would protest. Weep, of course. Weaken the resolution of the two boys who just had to go through with it all.</p>
			<p>And now the motor would be drawing up at the mill, and János the miller would ask the company to walk in and have a drink. Even the motor-driver would be persuaded. Just a drop of spirit, as it was a long drive all the way to Hódmezö. Time was moving leaden-footed up here in the château. But not so at the mill, while János was telling funny stories and plying his guests with drink. Leaden-footed! My God! how slowly did those clock hands move! Only half an hour gone by since Elza had switched off all the lights, and the whole château was plunged in darkness, and every sound was stilled.</p>
			<p>So still! Only the ticking of the clock, and at times the click of the scissors of Fate, ready to cut the thread of two young lives⁠—of more perhaps⁠—if anything went wrong, if the slightest mistake was made, if any one man proved disloyal⁠—or a liar.</p>
			<p>Rosemary shuddered although the night was hot. She could not sit still. At times she felt that she could not breathe. She went out upon the balcony and listened. Listened. The air was so still that she felt she must hear presently the whir of the motor when it made a fresh start from the mill half a mile away. Far away on the hillside a fox gave a cry, and from the old thatched barn close by came the melancholy hoot of an owl.</p>
			<p>Then the village church clock struck the half-hour. Half-past one. More than an hour since Rosemary, going into the ballroom, had noted that Philip and Anna were no longer there. In one of the homesteads on the outskirts of the village a cock crew. In another two hours dawn would be breaking, and the motor was to be in Hódmezö before sunrise. And suddenly Rosemary heard right through the stillness a crepitation and then a whir. And then the whirring died away very gradually, and stillness reigned once more. Absolute!</p>
			<p>“They’ve started!”</p>
			<p>It was Elza’s voice close to Rosemary’s elbow. Rosemary had not heard her timid knock, and Elza had slipped into the room and now stood by the open window, listening. The voice was quite calm, with just a ring in it of exultation rather than excitement. Rosemary took her hand. It was quite cold. She fondled it and warmed it between her own.</p>
			<p>There was a wicker chair on the balcony and some cushions. Rosemary made Elza sit down, and then she piled up the cushions and squatted on them at Elza’s feet, fondling her hands and caressing them by laying her young velvety cheek against them.</p>
			<p>The night was exquisitely beautiful, with the waning moon mysterious and honey-coloured in a firmament shimmering with stars. In the borders the flowers slept, the evening primroses had folded their golden petals, the scarlet pentstemons hidden their brilliance in the gloom; only the heliotrope and the nicotiana swung their censers, lazily sending their heady perfume through the night, and the white tufted pansies shone like numberless tiny mirrors, reflecting the stars.</p>
			<p>“Did Maurus get to sleep?” Rosemary asked after a while.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Elza replied. “I gave him a cachet of aspirin. It quietened his nerves, and after a while he went to sleep.”</p>
			<p>“Won’t you just close your eyes, Elza, and try to rest a little? The night is young yet, and I am afraid you’ll be ill if you don’t get a little rest. You’ve gone through so much!”</p>
			<p>“Presently, darling,” Elza said quietly. “I dare say I shall drop to sleep, as I am very tired. But not just yet. I would like to stay here a little longer⁠—unless I am bothering you.” Then, as Rosemary gave her knees an affectionate hug, she went on gently: “I love the smell of flowers in the night, don’t you? They smell quite differently from what they do in the daytime.” And presently she went on <i>à propos</i> of nothing at all:</p>
			<p>“There is just one difficult place where the driver might miss his way. That would delay them a little, but even so they should be very near the frontier by now.”</p>
			<p>“Have you arranged to get any news?” Rosemary asked.</p>
			<p>“Philip is to telephone from Hódmezö as soon as the office is open.”</p>
			<p>“You won’t hear before then?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. I told János to say to the motor-driver that if he will drive straight back here from Hódmezö there will be a thousand leis for him, and if he gets here before eight o’clock then he will get two thousand.”</p>
			<p>After the village church clock had struck three Elza became very still, but Rosemary did not think that she was actually asleep. Her hands were very cold, and her breath came and went more rapidly than usual. Rosemary rose noiselessly to her feet, she got the eiderdown from her bed and wrapped it round Elza’s knees. Elza did not move. Her pretty, round face showed very white in the light of the waning moon, and all her hair seemed to have lost its golden tint and shimmered like threads of silver.</p>
			<p>Rosemary went back into the room and lay down on the sofa. The air was very close, and she was very tired, so tired that she must have fallen asleep. Presently something roused her and she opened her eyes. The room was flooded with the golden light of dawn. She jumped to her feet and went to the window. Elza was not on the balcony; but Rosemary, looking over the balustrade, saw her on the veranda about to descent the steps.</p>
			<p>“Elza,” she called down softly, “wait for me.”</p>
			<p>Elza nodded acquiescence, and Rosemary ran down-stairs just as she was, in dressing-gown and slippers, with her hair all hanging loosely round her shoulders. Elza had waited on the veranda for her quite patiently; she linked her arm in Rosemary’s.</p>
			<p>“You were able to sleep a little, darling,” she said. “I am so glad.”</p>
			<p>“And what about you, Elza?” Rosemary retorted.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I slept quite nicely,” Elza replied in her quiet, simple way, “until the dawn closed the eyes of the night one by one, and the moon went down behind the old acacia trees.”</p>
			<p>“I quite forgot to look at the time,” Rosemary rejoined.</p>
			<p>“It was half-past four when I left your room. I went to have a peep at Maurus. He is still asleep.”</p>
			<p>“Thank God for that. He will only wake to hear the good news.”</p>
			<p>Rosemary could no longer keep the excitement out of her voice. Another two or three hours and this terrible suspense would be over. She hardly dared to look at Elza, for she felt the dear creature’s body quivering against hers. The first glance had shown her Elza’s face the colour of ashes, with swollen eyelids and red hectic spots on her cheek-bones. But outwardly she was still quite calm, and when together they reached the dew-wet lawn she threw back her head and with obvious delight drank in the sweet morning air.</p>
			<p>“It is astonishing,” she said, “that one should be able to sleep when⁠—when things happen like they did to-night.”</p>
			<p>“You were dog-tired, Elza, and the air was so wonderfully balmy and soothing. I think,” Rosemary went on gently, “that God sent down a couple of his guardian angels to fan you to sleep with their wings.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” Elza assented with a tired smile.</p>
			<p>“Do you feel like a walk, as far as the perennial border?”</p>
			<p>“Why, yes. I should love it. And we still have hours to kill.”</p>
			<p>Already sounds of awakening village life filled the morning with their welcome strains. The fox and the owl were silent, but two cocks gave answer to one another, and from the homesteads and the farms came a lowing and a bleating and a barking, the beasts rousing the humans to activity and calling them to the work of the day.</p>
			<p>As Elza’s and Rosemary’s footsteps crunched the gravel of the path, Mufti, the big sheep-dog, and Karo, the greyhound, came from nowhere in particular, bounding across the lawn, and threw themselves, in the exuberance of their joy, upon these two nice humans who had shortened the lonely morning hours for them.</p>
			<p>“Let’s go and see the moss-roses,” Rosemary suggested, “see if they smell as sweet as they did in the night.”</p>
			<p>They walked on to the end of the perennial border, where two or three clumps of moss-roses nestled at the foot of a tall crimson Rugosa laden with blossom.</p>
			<p>“Dear little things,” Elza said. “They are my favourite flowers. I like them so much better than all those wonderful new roses that get the prizes at the horticultural shows.”</p>
			<p>She stooped to inhale the fragrance of the roses, and while she was stooping a faint, very distant whirring sound became audible, which grew in volume every moment. Just for the space of one second Elza did not move; she remained just as she was, stooping and with her face buried in the roses. Then she straightened out her fine figure and grasped Rosemary’s hand.</p>
			<p>“The motor,” she said huskily. “Let us go.”</p>
			<p>The end of the perennial border where they were was nearly a quarter of a mile away from the house; and then there was the house to get round, the courtyard to cross⁠—The whirring grew louder every moment, then slower, and then it ceased. The car had come to a halt, but not in front of the gates, which were still closed. Rosemary and Elza were in the courtyard with Mufti and Karo jumping about them and getting in the way. The motor was not in sight.</p>
			<p>“Down, Mufti! Karo, down!” Elza kept repeating mechanically.</p>
			<p>She was rather breathless after that race across the garden. Rosemary ran to the lodge to call Feri, the night-watchman, who had the keys of the gate. He had heard the dogs barking and the voice of the gracious countess, so he was on the doorstep wondering what had brought the ladies out at this hour of the morning.</p>
			<p>“Quick, Feri, open the gates!” Rosemary called to him.</p>
			<p>It took Feri a few moments to get the keys to unlock the gates. An eternity.</p>
			<p>From the direction of the village there had come a loud cry, followed after a few seconds by shouts and the sound of men running. Running and shouting, and now and then another shrill cry.</p>
			<p>“Run ahead quickly, Feri,” Rosemary whispered to the watchman. “Quickly, see what it is.”</p>
			<p>She held Elza’s hand in the tight clutch, and under her arm. But even so Elza succeeded in breaking free, and while Feri ran on ahead, she did not lag far behind. Past the thick clump of acacias, the village street came in sight. At the end of it, a quarter of a mile away, in front of the inn which was kept by the Jew, a motorcar had come to a halt, and some half-dozen peasants stood round it, gesticulating and arguing. Down the street, from one or two of the cottages, men, women and children came running out to see what was happening, and when they caught sight of the gracious countess and the gracious foreign lady they paused, bewildered. The gracious countess⁠—at this hour in the village! Such a thing had never happened before. The men doffed their hats, the women hastily bobbed a curtsy, the children stood stock-still, finger in mouth, staring. A few, bolder than the rest, ran forward to kiss the ladies’ hands. But Elza hastened on, seeing nothing, heeding nothing, whilst Rosemary kept close by her side. Feri, as he drew near to the inn, shouted to the people to make way. But as soon as he came in close sight of the car he turned and hastened back to Elza. He clasped his hands together and cried:</p>
			<p>“Don’t come, gracious countess. Don’t come! It is nothing, nothing, just an accident, a⁠—”</p>
			<p>Silently, with lips tightly pressed together, Elza pushed past him, but Rosemary now had once more taken hold of her hand. She held Elza tight, with one arm round her waist and the other clutching her hand. Struggle as she might, Elza could not free herself this time.</p>
			<p>The next moment they stood together by the side of the motor. It was a large, rather shabby touring car, painted a dull grey and fitted with leather cushions. It was smothered in dust. There was no one in the back seats, but the innkeeper was just in the act of climbing in beside the chauffeur. The chauffeur appeared to be asleep; he sat like a huddled-up heap, wrapped in a dirty, military coat, and with his peaked cap pulled down over his face. The innkeeper appeared rather scared. He took hold of the military coat and pulled it open, and immediately he clapped his hand to his mouth, smothering a scream. The cap rolled off the chauffeur’s head, and his right arm dropped down the side of the car. One man who stood quite near, not knowing probably that the two ladies were there, cried excitedly:</p>
			<p>“God in heaven! The man has been shot-dead!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
