<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
			<p>Rosemary went slowly up the veranda steps. She did not feel that it would be loyal to pry into Elza’s secrets, but at the same time she wanted to remain well within call. From where she was she could see Peter’s broad shoulders blocking the French window which gave on the drawing-room. From somewhere in the house, both above and below stairs, came the sound of laughter and song.</p>
			<p>A moment or two later she heard Elza’s footsteps behind her on the gravel walk, and presently Elza was there, going up the veranda steps beside Rosemary. She did not say a word, and Rosemary asked no questions. She could see that Elza was preoccupied. She also noticed that the letter⁠—or whatever it was⁠—was not in Elza’s hands.</p>
			<p>Peter stood aside to allow the two ladies to step into the drawing-room. He asked no questions either, and Elza did not volunteer any information. It seemed as if the incident of the mysterious gipsy had never been. Later on Peter sat down at the piano and played a <i>csàrdàs</i>, for Philip and Anna to dance. They were beautiful dancers, both of them, and it was a pleasure to watch them swaying and bending to the syncopated cadences of the beautiful Hungarian music. Peter, too, had evidently that music in the blood. Rosemary had no idea he could play it so well. He seemed just as excited as the dancers, and accelerated the movements of the <i>csàrdàs</i> until little Anna called for mercy, and even Philip seemed ready to give in. For the time being Rosemary forgot her troubles in the joy of seeing those two enjoying themselves, and the delight of listening to Peter. What a pity, she thought, as she had often done, that he should waste all the poetry, the talent that was in him, and only devote his mind to cricket. She drew close up to the piano, to watch his slender fingers flying over the keys, and as she did so, her glance at one moment wandered to the small what-not in the corner by the piano. There, in the midst of a miscellaneous collection of cigarette boxes, ash-trays, match-boxes, lay a small automatic.</p>
			<p>Peter caught her eye, which at the moment expressed a mute inquiry. He shrugged his shoulders and smiled. He had a cigarette in a long holder in the corner of his mouth, but he contrived to murmur:</p>
			<p>“Yes, the blighter; wasn’t I right to thrash him?”</p>
			<p>Rosemary looked across at Elza. She sat quite placidly, as she always did, close to her husband’s chair, watching her Philip⁠—her soul in her eyes. She was smiling, and now and then she turned to say a word or two to Maurus; but to Rosemary she still looked preoccupied, and once she caught Elza’s large kind eyes fixed upon her with a curious, scrutinizing gaze.</p>
			<p>An hour later when Rosemary was in her room and beginning to undress, there was a knock at her door, and Elza came in, with that kindly smile of hers still on her face, but with a troubled look in her eyes.</p>
			<p>“May I come in for a moment, darling?” she asked.</p>
			<p>Rosemary made her comfortable on the sofa, and sat down beside her. Elza took hold of both her hands and fondled them, stroking them up and down, and she began talking about Philip and Anna, and the dancing and the plans for future parties, and picnics and so on. Rosemary let her prattle on; it was her turn to scrutinize Elza’s face closely. That something was troubling this dear, kind creature was obvious. She was, as it were, gathering her moral forces before she broached something unpleasant that she had come to say. It was no use brusquing the matter, and Rosemary entered into Elza’s plans, discussed the coming dinner-parties, the proposed lists of guests, talked about Anna’s future, and made some remarks about Peter.</p>
			<p>This brought the main subject on the tapis.</p>
			<p>“Where did you and Peter first see that gipsy?” Elza asked presently.</p>
			<p>“He was hiding in the shrubbery,” Rosemary replied, “behind the flower border. I didn’t see him. Peter saw him and pounced upon him, and dragged him out on to the path.”</p>
			<p>“Funny he did not just go to the service door and ask for me, wasn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“That’s what Peter thought. I am afraid he treated the poor wretch rather roughly.”</p>
			<p>“I am sorry he did that,” Elza mused, and thoughtfully stroked Rosemary’s slender fingers between her own. “The man really had a message for me.”</p>
			<p>“I know,” Rosemary rejoined; “a letter.”</p>
			<p>“No, it wasn’t a letter,” Elza said, and looked Rosemary now straight between the eyes. “You know these gipsies are queer people. They have curious gifts of divination and prophecy. This man⁠—”</p>
			<p>She seemed to hesitate, her glance wavered, and once more she started mechanically stroking Rosemary’s hands.</p>
			<p>“But the man had a letter for you, Elza dear,” Rosemary insisted. “I saw it in his hand.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, that was only a blind; and so was his story about the gentleman on a horse. He told me that he had come all the way from Ujlak to speak with me. Ujlak is where I was born, and my dear brother and Peter’s mother. My sister-in-law lives there still. Anna was born there, and little Marie. It was my father’s home and my grandfather’s before him, and our ancestors’ for many generations. Well, this gipsy came from there.”</p>
			<p>“In order to speak with you?”</p>
			<p>“So he said.”</p>
			<p>“Well, and what did he have to tell you?” Rosemary asked.</p>
			<p>“That he had had a vision. My father had appeared before him in a dream, and told him that he must start at once and seek me. He was to tell me that he whom I love best in all the world is in immediate danger of death.”</p>
			<p>Rosemary never moved; she was looking straight at Elza. Only when Elza paused, seeming to wait for some word from her, Rosemary said:</p>
			<p>“That wretched creature told you that?”</p>
			<p>Elza nodded. She went on simply:</p>
			<p>“I see by your face, dear, that he told the truth, not only in that, but in what he said was to follow.”</p>
			<p>“What was that?”</p>
			<p>“He said that the stranger now within our gates knows of this danger, and would confirm what he said. Well, my darling, I only need look at your sweet face to see that that miserable wretch spoke the truth. He was inspired by a dream to come and speak with me. But I would not question him further. Those gipsies often lie, and they will tell you any tale in order to get a few coppers. But I saw your look when I told you what he said, and it is from you that I want the truth. What is the danger that threatens Philip?”</p>
			<p>“Elza, darling⁠—” Rosemary murmured.</p>
			<p>“I am his mother, you know,” Elza interposed, with her gentle, quiet smile. “I must know. He is all the world to me. And as soon as you knew that something threatened him, you should have told me, my darling.”</p>
			<p>Then, as Rosemary was still fighting with herself, alternately praying to God for guidance, and striving to swallow the tears that were choking her, Elza went on quite quietly:</p>
			<p>“It is difficult for you, of course,” she said, and patted Rosemary’s cheek like an indulgent mother, “but it would have been better to tell me at first. I have had a very, very happy week since the children came home, but looking back on it now, I don’t think that I was ever quite free from a vague sort of doubt. I was always a little uneasy, and whenever Philip kissed me, I could not help crying.”</p>
			<p>Elza had spoken in a curious, dreamy manner, her round blue eyes fixed somewhere on vacant space. But now she seemed to pull herself together, she looked once more at Rosemary, gave her an encouraging smile, and said in a perfectly quiet, matter-of-fact tone:</p>
			<p>“Well, now tell me all about it. Philip’s release and Anna’s is only a temporary one. Is that it?”</p>
			<p>Rosemary nodded. She could not trust herself to speak. Elza gave a little gasp, but her voice was still quite steady as she went on questioning Rosemary:</p>
			<p>“What is the charge against them?”</p>
			<p>“Philip wrote certain newspaper articles,” Rosemary replied, and her voice sounded mechanical, like that of an automaton, “which have appeared in the English and American press. Anna used to send those through in the parcels she packed up in Balog’s shop.”</p>
			<p>“I knew about those articles,” Elza rejoined simply. “Everybody in Transylvania knew about them, but I did not guess that Philip had anything to do with them, or Anna. Then,” she went on with a little catch in her throat, “it means a charge of treason against the State?”</p>
			<p>“Yes!”</p>
			<p>“Military tribunal?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“And⁠—if they are found guilty⁠—a sentence of death?”</p>
			<p>“No! No! No!” And Rosemary was on her knees with her arms round Elza’s shoulders, her tear-stained face turned up to her, protesting vigorously, strenuously, that which she knew was false. But Elza’s big, round eyes were tearless; she looked a little wildly perhaps, but quite kindly into the beautiful face that expressed such a world of love and sympathy. Then, gently but firmly, she disengaged herself from Rosemary’s arms.</p>
			<p>“Well now, my dear,” she asked, very quietly, “all this being so, why did Naniescu let those children come home at all? Why should he postpone their trial, their⁠—their punishment?”</p>
			<p>Rosemary’s head fell upon her breast.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” she murmured.</p>
			<p>But Elza put her podgy finger under Rosemary’s chin, and forced her to look up.</p>
			<p>“Don’t lie to me, darling,” she pleaded softly; “tell me the truth.”</p>
			<p>“I have told you the truth, Elza,” Rosemary protested through her tears.</p>
			<p>“Then I must believe you, if you say so. And yet it is all very mysterious. Why should Naniescu wait? Why should he play with those poor children, like a cat does with a mouse? You know, Rosemary darling, what they gipsy said in the end?”</p>
			<p>Rosemary shook her head.</p>
			<p>“He said that the stranger within the gates had the power to save my son from death. Have you that power, Rosemary?”</p>
			<p>“No! No!” Rosemary protested wildly. “If it were in my power, don’t you think that I would do anything in the world to save Philip and Anna?”</p>
			<p>Elza nodded.</p>
			<p>“Yes, dear,” she said gently. “Of course I do think it; but when the gipsy said that, I could not help feeling hopeful, for he was right in everything else he said⁠—”</p>
			<p>Then suddenly she took Rosemary’s face between her two hands, and she gazed into her eyes with a look of almost fierce intensity in her own, as if she would wrest a secret from the depths of the younger woman’s soul.</p>
			<p>“Swear to me, Rosemary,” she said, and her gentle voice sounded raucous and harsh, “swear to me that there is nothing in the world that you can do to save Philip!”</p>
			<p>And Rosemary, returning her gaze, replied steadily:</p>
			<p>“I swear to you that it is not in my power to save Philip and Anna. If it were, I would do it.”</p>
			<p>Even then Elza did not cry. She just sat there quite, quite still, her big, round eyes quite dry, her mouth without a quiver, but sitting there so still, so still with her beautiful golden hair all round her face, the soft streaks of grey all about her temples, her fine features rigid, her podgy white hands resting on her knees; she looked such a tragic figure of despair that Rosemary could hardly suppress the cry of anguish that rose insistently to her throat.</p>
			<p>“And so we can do nothing,” Elza said, with a note of quiet finality in her voice.</p>
			<p>“Don’t say that, dear,” Rosemary protested. “Jasper, as a matter of fact, has gone to Bucharest to try and see the King personally. The Roumanian Government owes some gratitude to my husband, as you know. I am quite sure that he will bring strong pressure to bear upon the authorities, and get a full pardon for Philip and Anna on the score of their youth.”</p>
			<p>But Elza slowly shook her head.</p>
			<p>“You don’t believe yourself, darling,” she said, “in what you say. The children have committed the unpardonable crime of being born Hungarians, and of resenting foreign tyranny in their native land. The King himself would be kind, I am sure, but Bucharest is a long way off, and the bureaucrats over here do not know the meaning of the word ‘mercy’.”</p>
			<p>“But we know the meaning of the word ‘hope,’ Elza dear,” Rosemary said steadily, and struggled to her feet. “We are not going to give up hope. You talk about your gipsies having the gift of prophecy. Well, it is my turn to prophesy now. Philip and Anna are in God’s hands, and you and I are going to pray so hard and so ceaselessly that God will help us, I am sure. I know,” she added firmly.</p>
			<p>Elza gave a short, quick sigh.</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes,” she said, “you are lucky, you English! Your religion means a great deal to you. But we, over here, are so different. We go to convent schools when we are too young to understand. Then we are all fire and enthusiasm, but we do not understand. After that we marry and live in those remote villages where the poor <i>curé</i> is only an illiterate peasant with whom we have nothing in common, whose habits are often such that we could not possibly make our confession to him. And so we soon forget what we learned in our childhood, and we come to trusting in ourselves rather than in God.”</p>
			<p>She rose and, with the same motherly gentleness which she always showed to Rosemary, she folded the girl in her loving arms.</p>
			<p>“Good night, my dear,” she said placidly. “I ought not to have kept you up so late. Good night, dear. Pray to your God for us all. The God of the English is more merciful, I think, than ours.”</p>
			<p>“Elza,” Rosemary insisted, “promise me that you will not give up hope. Jasper comes back to-morrow. He may bring the best of news. Promise me that in any case you will not give up hope.”</p>
			<p>The ghost of a smile appeared on Elza’s face.</p>
			<p>“I will promise,” she said, “not altogether to give up faith.”</p>
			<p>Rosemary kissed her tenderly. After that she escorted her as far as her room, and at the door she kissed her once more, and then she said, with solemn earnestness:</p>
			<p>“Elza darling, will you believe me if I say that if I could give my life for those two children I would do it? If it were in my power to save them, I would. But it is not in my power to save them, to do anything, but to leave them in God’s hands.”</p>
			<p>Elza returned her kiss with gentleness and affection.</p>
			<p>“Dear, kind Rosemary,” she murmured; “go to bed, dear, you must be so tired.”</p>
			<p>Then she quietly slipped into her room and closed the door. And Rosemary was left to face the night alone.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
