<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
			<p>Budapest had been baking all day under a merciless sun in late July. But at this hour the coolness of a clear moonlit evening sent everyone out of doors. The Corso was crowded.</p>
			<p>Rosemary Tarkington, on the terrace of the café, sat sipping delicious coffee and lazily watching the throng. Now and then she would look straight out before her, and her eyes would lose all sense of fatigue as she gazed on the incomparable panorama before her: the ornate palace of the Hapsburgs, and the cathedral of <abbr>St.</abbr> Matthias, and on the left, towering above all, high upon the rock, the great grim fortress that for over a century had held the Turks at bay and saved Europe from the hordes of Islam. One by one tiny lights began to wink and to blink in the houses that rose tier upon tier on the slopes across the river, whilst down below gaily illuminated boats flitted to and fro upon the turbulent waters of the Danube, carrying a burden of merrymakers home from the shady island of Ste. Marguerite close by. The whole scene before Rosemary’s eyes was one of unrivalled picturesqueness and animation. No town in Europe presents quite so enthralling a spectacle, and one whose charm is still further enhanced by the strains of those half-sad, half-voluptuous Hungarian melodies which come to the ear from out the shadows, or from the passing river boats, gentle as a caress, soothing to nerves and senses by their sweet melancholy rhythm, or exhilarating when they break into their peculiarly harmonious syncopated cadences.</p>
			<p>Rosemary had specially elected to put up at the Hungaria rather than in one of the more modern, recently built hotels. For her the Hungaria was full of associations, of joyous times spent there when she was still a schoolgirl in the days before the war. She had travelled in Hungary and Transylvania under ideal conditions with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blakeney, Peter’s mother, seeing the best this romantic country had to offer, welcomed always with that large-hearted hospitality peculiar to these kindly people. But memory recalled more strenuous times, too, those in the early days of her journalistic career, when her heart was filled with pity for the sufferings of a proud and ill-starred country, whose fairest lands had been flung like rags by thoughtless politicians as a sop to those who had been her associates in the war until the hour when self-interest prompted them to throw in their lot with the other side.</p>
			<p>“You must be very tired, Lady Tarkington,” a pleasant voice said close to her elbow.</p>
			<p>“Not tired,” Rosemary replied, “but rather dazed. The journey over from England is slower and much more fatiguing than it used to be.”</p>
			<p>Captain and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Payson were sitting beside her at the table. Recently attached to the British Military Mission in Hungary, Captain Payson and his young wife lived at the Hungaria. It had been a great pleasure for them to see Rosemary again, whom they had known for several years, and after supper they had all foregathered on the terrace over their coffee. Some few minutes before this Jasper had elected to take a turn on the Corso, to stretch his legs and to smoke a cigar, but Rosemary felt too lazy to move, and she like to talk to the Paysons, who were genial and intellectual, and with whom she had a great deal in common in the way of associations and friends.</p>
			<p>“The place has not altered much,” Rosemary went on after a while. “The people here are always gay and cheerful⁠—in spite of⁠—of everything.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” little <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Payson assented lightly. “Give them their music, their delicious wines and perfect cooking, and nine out of ten Hungarians won’t care if they are ruled by King or Emperor, by foreign tyrant or Bolshevist ruffian.”</p>
			<p>“I always think Ruth is wrong when she says that,” Captain Payson put in earnestly. “The Hungarians are sportsmen, as we are, and they are taking their punishment like sportsmen. They are not going to let the world see how much they suffer. In that way they are very different from the Germans.”</p>
			<p>“They behaved with unparalleled folly,” Rosemary remarked.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” the captain retorted, “and with commendable loyalty. The Hungarians are a nation of gentlemen, just as the British. They, like ourselves, are worshippers of tradition. They are royalists in their hearts, almost to a man. Just thing what their feelings must be whenever they look across the river and gaze on that gorgeous palace over there, whence their anointed King has been driven by petty foreign politicians who scarcely knew where Hungary was situated on the map.”</p>
			<p>Before Rosemary could pursue the subject she caught sight of her husband forging his way towards her between the crowded tables of the terrace.</p>
			<p>“Naniescu is down below,” Jasper said as soon as he had reached his wife’s side. “I told him you were up here, and he said he wished to pay his respects. He is talking to some friends for the moment, but he will be here directly.”</p>
			<p>“Then Ruth and I had better run,” Captain Payson said lightly. “He and I are always on the verge of a quarrel when we meet.”</p>
			<p>He and his wife rose and took their leave; there was much talking and laughing and promises to meet on the morrow. When they had gone Rosemary said to her husband: “I would rather not have seen General Naniescu tonight. I am very tired, and honestly I don’t feel at my best.”</p>
			<p>“I am so sorry,” Jasper replied at once, full of contrition. “I did my utmost to put him off. I knew, of course, that you must be very tired. But he leaves Budapest early tomorrow morning. He is going to Cluj⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Cluj?” she asked, puzzled, then laughed lightly. “Oh, ah!” she went on. “I always forget that dear old Kolozsvár is Cluj now.”</p>
			<p>“Naniescu was anxious to see that our passports were quite in order, and as this is important⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You did quite right, dear,” Rosemary rejoined gently, “as you always do. I don’t suppose the general will keep us long⁠—though he is a terrible talker,” she added with a sigh.</p>
			<p>A moment or two later the handsome Romanian came up to Rosemary’s table.</p>
			<p>“Ah, dear lady,” he said, and with habitual elaborate gesture he took her hand and raised it to his lips. “What a joy it is to see that you have fulfilled your promise and that you are here at last.”</p>
			<p>He sat down at the table but declined Jasper’s offer of a liqueur or cup of coffee.</p>
			<p>“I am only here for a moment,” he said, “Overwhelmed with work and with engagements. But I thought it would save you trouble if I just looked at your passports and saw that they were entirely in order.”</p>
			<p>“That is more than kind,” Rosemary rejoined, whilst Jasper went immediately to fetch the passports. For a moment or two Rosemary remained silent and absorbed. An indefinable something had caused her to shrink when she felt General Naniescu’s full lips upon her hand⁠—something hostile and portentous. The next moment this feeling had gone, and she was ready to chide herself for it. Naniescu was earnest, persuasive, elaborately polite in manner and florid of speech just as he had been in London, when first he put his proposal before her, and certainly there was not a hint of anything sinister about him.</p>
			<p>“I am looking forward to my visit to Transylvania,” Rosemary said quite gaily.</p>
			<p>“You will find every official there ready to welcome you, dear lady,” Naniescu assured her. “You need only express a wish, to find it met in every possible way. And if you should do me the honour of requiring my personal services, needless to say that I should fly immediately to obey your commands.”</p>
			<p>Rosemary shrugged her pretty shoulders.</p>
			<p>“I don’t anticipate any such call upon your valuable time,” she said coolly.</p>
			<p>“Ah, one never knows. You, dear lady, are going amongst a strange people,” he added with a sigh. “People whose supposed grievances have made bitter.”</p>
			<p>“I have old friends in Transylvania, and will feel as safe with them as I should in my flat in London.”</p>
			<p>“You will stay the whole time with the Imreys?” the general asked.</p>
			<p>“Who told you I was going to stay with them?” she retorted quickly.</p>
			<p>“You yourself, dear lady,” he replied, unperturbed, “or did I merely make a shrewd guess? Anyway, on that unforgettable evening at the Albert Hall, when first I had the honour of an introduction to you, I saw you dancing with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blakeney. The Countess Imrey is his mother’s sister⁠—you told me that you had friends in Transylvania⁠—the inference surely was obvious. I trust I have not offended you,” Naniescu went on in his most mellifluous tone, “by the suggestion.”</p>
			<p>“No, no,” Rosemary replied, already vexed with herself for having unwittingly provoked the Romanian into one of those elaborate speeches which irritated her and gave her a vague feeling that malicious irony lurked behind so much blandness. “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blakeney was a dear friend of mine; she and I travelled a great deal together, and I stayed more than once with the Imreys, not only at Kis-Imre, but in their beautiful house at Kolozsvár.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, then,” the general rejoined, “if you know the house at Cluj, you would⁠—in the scarce probable likelihood of your wishing to command my services⁠—know where to find me?”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“I am living in the Imreys’ house now.”</p>
			<p>“But⁠—how can that be?” Rosemary retorted, somewhat puzzled, for she knew that in this part of Europe the idea of letting their house to strangers would never occur to proud, wealthy people like the Imreys, as it does so readily to those of their caste in England. But when General Naniescu, with an indifferent shrug, replied dryly: “Oh, the house was a great deal too big for the occupation of a small family. On public grounds we cannot allow the many to suffer for the whims of a few,” Rosemary frowned, no longer puzzled. She felt rather than saw that the Romanian’s dark, mellow eyes rested on her for an instant with a look of quiet mockery. But it was a mere flash. The next moment he was as suave as before, and said with that perfect deference which he had always affected when speaking to her about her work:</p>
			<p>“That question, dear lady, will be one which I earnestly hope you will approach with an open mind, and on which your brilliant intellect will, I trust, shed the light of truth.”</p>
			<p>Jasper’s return with the passports brought on a fresh train of thought. Naniescu pronounced them to be in perfect order. He added a special note and signature to the visa which had been obtained from the Romanian Consul in London. Rosemary was feeling very tired and longed to go to bed, but Naniescu stayed on, talking desultorily to Jasper about politics and social conditions, all matters which Rosemary did not feel sufficiently alert to discuss. Her thoughts wandered away and she scarcely heard what the two men were saying; she was, in fact, just meditating on a polite-form of abrupt leave-taking when something that Naniescu said arrested her attention.</p>
			<p>“My Government,” the Romanian was saying, obviously in reply to a remark from Jasper, “is quite alive to the evil wrought by those pernicious articles which appear from time to time in English and American newspapers⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Then why doesn’t your censor stop them?” Jasper queried bluntly.</p>
			<p>“He would, my dear Lord Tarkington,” Naniescu rejoined blandly, “he would. But those devils are so astute. How they manage to smuggle their articles through the post I for one cannot for the life of me make out.”</p>
			<p>“Ah,” Rosemary put in with a smile, as quietly ironical as Naniescu’s had been a while ago, “you still carry on a strict censorship, then? You do not believe in liberty of speech or of the Press.”</p>
			<p>“We do, dear lady, indeed we do. But unfortunately the English and American Press are so easily captured by sentimentality. Put a case before them of supposed wrong, however preposterous and palpably false, and they will revel in it, print it with capital headlines, and so capture the imagination of their sentimental, unthinking readers that these will no longer listen to the voice of reason or of truth. We are too proud⁠—or perhaps not clever enough⁠—to combat such barefaced propaganda; a strict censorship may be a crude weapon, but it is the only one at our command. What would you? A man who is attacked defends himself as best as he can.”</p>
			<p>“But in this case your weapon is failing you?” Jasper queried in his quiet, incisive way. “Whoever sends those articles to England and America is apparently too clever for you.”</p>
			<p>“For the moment⁠—yes,” Naniescu admitted. “But,” he went on more lightly and at last rose to take his leave, “I fear my irresponsible prattle is keeping Lady Tarkington away from the rest she so much needs. Dear lady, pray accept my humble homage, and my earnest wish that your stay in our poor country will afford you all the delight that you anticipate.”</p>
			<p>He raised Rosemary’s hand to his lips with the same show of gallantry that marked his every action in her presence. Just before he finally released it he looked up with deep earnestness into her eyes:</p>
			<p>“Let me once more assure you, dear lady, that as far as you are concerned every word you write will be transmitted in its entirety and with all possible speed to its destination. All that you need do is to send your articles and letters in a sealed packet undercover to me. I give you my word of honour that you will be satisfied.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
