<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2>
			<p>Rosemary had wandered beyond the confines of the park, and roamed about in the woods, having lost all sense of time. When presently she came back to the reality of things she looked at her watch and saw that it was close on twelve o’clock. Luncheon at the chateau was at half-past. It meant stepping out briskly so as to be in time.</p>
			<p>As soon as she reached the flower-garden, it struck her as strange that the château suddenly appeared to be so quiet. No sound reached her as she came near to the veranda steps, either of shrill, excited voices, or of laughter or song.</p>
			<p>She found the family assembled on the veranda⁠—Maurus, Elza, Philip and Anna. Only Peter was not there. A first glance at them all revealed to Rosemary what had occurred. Elza had told them what the gipsy had said. Maurus sat in his chair like a man in a trance, his dark face flushed, his hair towzled, his large, dark eyes staring out before him, with a look in them that was not entirely sane.</p>
			<p>Philip, on the other hand, was pacing up and down the veranda floor, whilst Anna stood quite still, leaning against a column, looking for all the world like a little martyr tied to the stake, her small, thin hands clasped together, a faint flush on her cheeks. These two children looked excited rather than horror-filled. Anna’s face suggested that of an idealist⁠—not altogether resigned, but nevertheless eager to suffer for the cause. But Philip looked like a fighter, seeking for a chance to hit back, a combatant not yet brought to his knees.</p>
			<p>Elza’s round, blue eyes just wandered from one to the other of these faces all dear to her.</p>
			<p>They were dry eyes, anxious eyes, but there was nothing in them to-day of that tragic despair which had been so heart-breaking to behold the evening before.</p>
			<p>Rosemary’s first thought had been: “They know. Elza has told them!” The second was “Elza has a plan. Peter said it was a mad one. A plan for Philip and Anna’s escape.” She wondered if they would tell her.</p>
			<p>“I hope I am not late for lunch,” she said, rather breathlessly, as she had been walking very fast. Then she added casually: “Where is Peter?”</p>
			<p>“He is busy packing,” Elza replied.</p>
			<p>“Packing?” Rosemary exclaimed, puzzled. “He is not going away already?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Elza said, “to-night.”</p>
			<p>“But he did not say anything yesterday,” Rosemary insisted, “about going away again so soon. Or even this morning.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think he knew yesterday,” Elza rejoined. “It seems he had a telephone message half an hour ago. He says he must go.”</p>
			<p>Anna now appeared to wake out of her trance. Rosemary was standing close to her just then; she took Rosemary’s hand gently in hers and said:</p>
			<p>“You see, darling, it is like this: one of Peter’s cricketers has telephoned to him to say that they have such a lot of trouble about their rooms at Hódmezö. Roumanians are not exactly popular in Hungary,” she went on with a wan little smile, “and I suppose that hotel-keepers don’t care to put them up. So Peter had to promise to go and put things right for his cricketers.”</p>
			<p>“He will come back, of course, after the cricket match,” Elza concluded placidly. “But it is a great nuisance for him, packing and unpacking all the time.”</p>
			<p>Rosemary made no further remark. Everything seemed terribly puzzling. That Elza had told the children, had told Maurus, all she knew, was beyond the question. That Peter also knew everything, and that he knew and disapproved of some plan which Elza had made, Rosemary supposed, for the escape of Philip and Anna was, to her mind, equally certain. But even if Peter disapproved, how could he go away at this critical time, and leave Elza to plan and contrive alone, hampered by a half-crazy husband, and surrounded by spies? However, no one apparently meant to say anything more just then, and it was quite a relief when the luncheon-bell sounded and the little party on the veranda broke up and everyone trooped downstairs for luncheon.</p>
			<p>Peter was already in the dining-room, waiting for the others. Elza in her kind, gentle way asked him about his packing, and whether she could help him to get ready. But Peter declared that he wanted nothing, only the carriage this evening to take him to Cluj.</p>
			<p>He grumbled terribly at having to go away. He hated the idea of missing the ball and all the friends who were coming; but when Elza or Maurus tried to persuade him to stay, he was very firm. “I’ve got to go, Aunt Elza. You don’t know what complications might occur if those Roumanians got to Hódmezö and were not properly treated. Good God!” he added, with mock horror, “it might land you all in another war! And all through my fault!”</p>
			<p>Rosemary had never seen Peter so gay or conversational. He appeared entirely unconscious of the undercurrent of tragedy that flowed through Elza’s pathetic attempts at conversation, and Maurus’s equally tragic silences. He talked incessantly, chiefly about the cricket match and chiefly to Philip, who made desperate efforts to appear interested. Rosemary did her best, too, but she was anxious and puzzled, and frankly she did not believe in the story of the telephone message.</p>
			<p>She tried now and then to catch Elza’s eye, but in this she never once succeeded. Elza was avoiding her glance. She meant to say nothing about her plan⁠—this mad plan of which Peter disapproved so thoroughly that he preferred to be out of the way. Did these dear, kind people mistrust her then, because of what the gipsy had said? Or was this reticence merely the natural outcome of a sense of supreme danger that mistrusted everything and everybody?</p>
			<p>Rosemary felt the mystery deepening around her. She could not understand Peter.</p>
			<p>Sometime after luncheon she found Elza and Anna sitting together in the small brick-built summer-house at the farther end of the lake. Rosemary had wandered as far as there with a book, anxious as she was to be out of the way. It was hot, and the air was very still, and the scent of tuberoses and heliotrope was almost too heady. In the perennial border a number of humming-bird moths were busy about a bed of sweet sultan; the soft whirring sound of their wings could be heard quite distinctly in the extreme stillness of this late summer’s afternoon. From time to time distant sounds of village life came in quick, short waves to Rosemary’s ear, as well as the sharp click of tools wielded by the gardeners at work somewhere in the park. Close beside the summer-house one man was busy hand-weeding the path. As Rosemary drew nearer, he looked up for an instant, and then he shuffled rapidly away. In the long, stooping figure, the dirty rags and the dark skin, Rosemary thought that she recognized the gipsy of the previous night. It was just like Elza, she thought, to give the poor wretch work on the estate.</p>
			<p>When Rosemary saw Elza and Anna sitting together in the summer-house, her instinct was to pass discreetly on, with just a hasty, cheery word, but Elza called to her.</p>
			<p>“Come and sit here a minute, Rosemary darling,” she said. “Anna and I want to tell you everything.”</p>
			<p>Everything! Rosemary without a word stepped into the little pavilion. Anna pulled a wicker chair forward between herself and Elza, and Rosemary sat down, a little anxious, a little fearful, wondering what these dear, enthusiastic hotheads had devised, and how she herself would act when she knew. Elza at once took hold of her hand and fondled it.</p>
			<p>“You asked me last night, darling,” she began, “not to give up hope, didn’t you?”</p>
			<p>Rosemary nodded acquiescence.</p>
			<p>“And I promised that I would not give up faith,” Elza went on quietly. “Well, I have kept my faith all through last night, which was very trying. With the dawn, hope came to me, and after that I once more felt in charity with all the world.”</p>
			<p>Rosemary gave Elza’s podgy white hand a tender squeeze. “Dear!” she whispered.</p>
			<p>“We have a plan, darling,” Elza said triumphantly. “A splendid plan! To-morrow night Philip and Anna will be in Hungary, safely out of the way.”</p>
			<p>Rosemary had known all along what was coming. She looked at Anna, who gave an excited little nod.</p>
			<p>“Tell Rosemary, Aunt Elza,” she said. “All from the beginning. There’s no one in the world you can trust as you can Rosemary.”</p>
			<p>“Listen then, darling,” Elza said, speaking quite quietly at first, then allowing excitement to get hold of her voice, making it tremble while she spoke, and husky with eagerness, while her command of the English tongue became less and less pronounced.</p>
			<p>“It has all been made possible by this cricket business, for which I thank God and Peter Blakeney. As I told you this morning, Peter’s cricket people are all coming here to-morrow for the ball. They have to be at Hódmezö the following day for the cricket. So they will bring their luggage, and make a start from here after the ball⁠—I suppose about midnight⁠—in three motor-cars which the Governor, General Naniescu, has himself placed at their disposition. Hódmezö is, as you know, in Hungary, just the other side of the frontier. It will be about four or five hour’s drive from here, as there is a short cut⁠—quite a good road⁠—which avoids Cluj. In two of those motor-cars the cricket people themselves will go; they are mostly young Roumanian officers and men of the better class. General Naniescu has, of course, given them all free passes for the occasion. Fortunately he has also given them passes for four servants to accompany them. These four men will go in the third motor, and they will also go in the motor all the way to Hódmezö. Now two of these servants, whom the local commissary of police has himself chosen and to whom passes have been given, are the two sons of János the miller, who is devoted to us all. His two sons have certainly served in the Roumanian army because they were obliged, but they have remained Hungarian at heart and would do anything for me and for Philip.”</p>
			<p>Elza paused. Her eager, round eyes searched Rosemary’s face. Rosemary, of course, had already guessed the rest, her own excitement while she listened was as tense as Elza’s. She gripped the white podgy little hand of her friend, and looked from her to Anna⁠—a mute question in every glance.</p>
			<p>“You can guess, of course?” Anna said.</p>
			<p>Rosemary nodded: “I can guess,” she said, “but do go on.”</p>
			<p>“I sent for János early this morning,” Elza went on. “All I had to tell him was that Philip and Anna were in great danger, and must be got out of the country at any cost. He understood! We Hungarians in this occupied territory all understand one another. We understand danger. We live with danger constantly at our door. And János was so clever, so helpful. I only had to outline my plan, he thought out all the details. The mill is about a kilometre from here, the last house in the village; as soon as the first two motors have gone with the cricket people and the Roumanian officers, Philip and Anna will at once run round to the mill, and János will give them clothes belonging to his sons. The clothes they will put on. In the meanwhile the third motor-car will have collected the two other men in the village who are going as servants to Hódmezö⁠—one is the brother of the Jew over at the inn, and the other the son of the Roumanian storekeeper. Then it will call at the mill. János will ask the two men to come in. He and his two sons will give them some strong spirit to drink. The brother of the Jew and the son of the storekeeper are both of them great drunkards. When they have become what you English call, I think, blotto, János will take them back into the motor. There they will sit; and will probably at once go to sleep. But Philip and Anna will also get into the motor. They will be dressed in peasant’s clothes, and they will have the free passes which Naniescu has given to János’ sons. They will get to Hódmezö about five o’clock in the morning. And once they are in Hungary they are safe. Rosemary darling! they are safe!”</p>
			<p>Rosemary had remained silent. The whole thing certainly at first glance appeared so easy, so simple that she found herself wondering why she or Jasper⁠—or Peter⁠—had never thought of such a plan. She also wondered why Peter should have spoken of it as a mad plan, and begged her if she had any influence with Elza to dissuade her from it. What had been in his mind when he said that? Of what was he afraid? Spies, of course. But spies, like the poor, were always there, and, after all, Philip and Anna would only be risking what already was forfeit⁠—their lives.</p>
			<p>Rosemary sat there in silence, her fingers closed over Elza’s soft, warm hand. She gazed straight before her, thinking. Thinking; her mind already following Philip and Anna’s flight through this hostile, cruel country, to the land which would mean freedom and life for them. She saw them in her mind’s eye, like a vision floating before her across the lake, which in this daydream had become a wide, dusty road with a motor-car speeding along toward life and toward freedom.</p>
			<p>It seemed a solution. It must be a solution. Thank God Jasper would be there to help with counsel and with suggestions. Elza was talking again now. In her quaint English, which became more and more involved, she continued to talk of her plan, as a child will talk of some event that made it happy. She harped on the details, on János’ devotion, the two sons who would make their way to the frontier in their father’s bullock cart, and then cross over to Hungary on foot, through the woods and over a mountain pass where there would be no fear of meeting Roumanian sentinels. At Hódmezö they would find Peter and the cricket people. They would get back their passes, and return quite gaily with the others, having saved the lives of Philip and Anna. Such devotion! Wasn’t it splendid?</p>
			<p>Rosemary only nodded from time to time, and from time to time she squeezed Elza’s hand. It was so hot and so airless here in the little pavilion with those clusters of climbing heliotrope all over the roof and half-blocking up the entrance. The bees and humming bird moths were making such a buzzing and a whirring; it was just like the hum of motor-car wheels on the dusty road. And through it all came the swishing sound of a garden broom upon the gravel path, between the summer-house and the stone coping around the ornamental lake. Rosemary caught herself watching the broom swinging backwards and forwards across the path, and across; she saw the two hands⁠—very dark lean hands they were⁠—that wielded the broom, and finally the gipsy’s tall, thin figure bent almost double to his task. It seemed just right that the man should be there at this hour, sweeping the path for Elza to walk on presently, for Philip also and for Anna. It was right because it was the gipsy who had told Elza what she, Rosemary, had not had the courage to say. There was very little mystery about the gipsy now; he was just a ragged, dirty labourer, bending to his task. Did the strange intuition⁠—or was it divination⁠—that had brought him all the way from his native village to speak with Elza whisper to him that his warning had already borne fruit, and that the gracious lady whom he had come to warn had found in faith and hope the way out of dark destiny?</p>
			<p>“Oh, that’s all right, darling! We spoke English all the time!”</p>
			<p>Elza said this with a light laugh. Rosemary woke from her day-dream. She must have been speaking in her dream⁠—about the gipsy who haunted her thoughts.</p>
			<p>“Did I say anything?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“Yes, darling,” Anna replied, “you have been very silent for the last minute or two, and then suddenly you said: ‘The gipsy, the gipsy,’ twice, like that. It sounded so funny.”</p>
			<p>“I thought,” Elza put in, “that perhaps you were afraid that the dirty old gipsy had heard what we said. But gipsies in Hungary don’t speak English, you know. For one thing they never go to school.”</p>
			<p>Elza appeared quite light-hearted now.</p>
			<p>“I knew,” she said, “that you would approve of my plan.”</p>
			<p>She said this, but Rosemary herself was quite unconscious that she had spoken. She had dreamed and dreamed, and seen a motor-car speeding along the dusty road. But through it all, she had approved, approved of the plan. It was so feasible, and so simple. She only wondered why Peter disapproved.</p>
			<p>“What does Peter Blakeney say to all that?” she asked presently.</p>
			<p>“Peter?”</p>
			<p>Elza asked wide-eyed.</p>
			<p>“Yes. You told him about your plan, didn’t you?”</p>
			<p>“No! No!” Elza asserted firmly. “We have told no one but you. Peter is going away. Why should we tell Peter?”</p>
			<p>“I thought⁠—” Rosemary murmured.</p>
			<p>“It will be time enough to tell him,” Anna put in gaily, “when Philip and I turn up at the hotel at Hódmezö. Won’t he be surprised when he sees us?”</p>
			<p>How strange it all was! Peter knew, since he spoke of a mad plan in Elza’s head, and begged Rosemary to dissuade her from it. Peter knew, though no one had told him. Another mystery added to all those which had of late filled Rosemary with such a torturing sense of foreboding. Another mystery that seemed to surround Peter’s changed personality, that seemed a part of this new personality of his, flippant and indifferent, so unlike the Peter she had known.</p>
			<p>Now she longed passionately for Jasper⁠—dear, kind Jasper, around whom there hung no mystery⁠—the strong hand that would guide her through this maze of intrigue which bewildered as much as it terrified her. Fortunately her promise to Jasper had been kept. With this new mystery about Peter that she vaguely dreaded, she would have been racked with anxiety if she had confided in him. And yet, how disloyal was this thought, this fear! Fear of Peter! Mistrust of Peter! A very little while ago she would have staked her soul that Peter was true, loyal, the soul of honour, an English gentleman, an English sportsman! A Blakeney! A Scarlet Pimpernel of to-day! What was there in the atmosphere of this unfortunate country groaning under a foreign, hated yoke to taint his simple soul with the foul breath of intrigue?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
