<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h2>
			<p>At Kis-Imre the day dragged on leaden-footed. Luncheon, then a long afternoon, then dinner. Time wore on and Elza had not returned.</p>
			<p>Rosemary was ready, dressed for the journey; her suitcase was packed. She was only taking a very little luggage with her as she had every intention of returning as soon as her errand in London was accomplished. She would not for the world have left Elza alone too long with her troubles. She made herself no illusions with regard to the telegram which she had sent from the village. It would, she was sure, be intercepted, and Naniescu would not allow it to go. Rosemary’s intention was to send another directly she was the other side of the frontier. This would prevent the articles being published hurriedly, and, of course, she would be in London thirty-six hours later.</p>
			<p>Indeed, the odious deed which Peter had planned and carried through appeared to her now not only in its hideousness but in its futility. What did he hope to accomplish? Did he know her so little as to imagine that she would merely call the occurrence an adverse blow of Fate and quietly sit down under it⁠—be content to send one wire which would be intercepted? It was futile! Futile! She was a British subject. She had a British passport. No power on earth could stop her from going to London or to the outermost ends of the earth if she had a mind. No one. Not even Jasper. Least of all Jasper!</p>
			<p>But in the meanwhile Elza had not returned. Time went on, slowly but certainly. Eight o’clock⁠—nine o’clock⁠—ten o’clock. Unless Elza was home within the next half-hour Rosemary could not start for London before the next night. There was only one through train to Budapest every twenty-four hours, the midnight express! Any other slow train would be no help for getting the communication with the Orient Express.</p>
			<p>And Rosemary could not go to London without knowing what Elza’s wishes were. Elza was to decide⁠—not she. And Elza had not come back from Anna’s mother. Soon after ten Rosemary sent Rosa round to Maurus to ask if she might see him. She hoped that he could perhaps tell her something definite about Elza’s movements. Rosemary found him very much altered since last she had seen him. He looked well in health, but his whole expression, even his appearance, seemed strange. The gipsy strain was more apparent⁠—the eyes seemed darker and more restless, the mouth redder and fuller, and the nose more hooked and narrower across the bridge. But he talked very quietly about Elza, because he had not really expected to see her back this evening.</p>
			<p>“She was going to Cluj first,” he said, “to see Philip and Anna. Probably it took time to get permission to visit the children in prison. Then after that she was going to Ujlak. I suppose she wanted to let Charlotte know how little Anna is getting on. Poor child! Poor child!” Maurus went on slowly, wagging his head. “Isn’t it pitiable? She is such a nice little girl. And my Philip⁠—my Philip⁠—”</p>
			<p>He rambled on, and his speech became thick and unintelligible. The sister in charge gave Rosemary a hint that it would be better for her to go. Rosemary rose at once.</p>
			<p>“Well, my dear Maurus,” she said, “I don’t want to tire you. I thought perhaps you might know something definite about Elza. But if you are not anxious about her I am sure it is all right.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, yes, it is all right. You see, she went to visit the children. Then she was going to Ujlak. It is a long way for the horses⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You don’t think she would stay in Cluj for the night?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know. I don’t know. She was going to Cluj first to see the children⁠—then she was going to Ujlak. It is a long way for the horses⁠—Elza will stay with Charlotte for the night. A hard woman, Charlotte. But Anna is such a nice child. And my Philip⁠—my Philip⁠—”</p>
			<p>The mind was obviously wandering. Maurus, while he spoke was staring straight out before him. Rosemary tried to explain to him that she had to go away on business for a day or two and she hoped to start this evening, but she could not go, of course, without seeing Elza first.</p>
			<p>“Ah! you are going away, dear Lady Tarkington?” the invalid said with a quick gleam in his restless, dark eyes. “I wish I could go with you. I am so sick of this place, and now that my Philip has gone⁠ ⁠… But how can you go tonight, dear Lady Tarkington?”</p>
			<p>“I won’t go before I have seen Elza.”</p>
			<p>“No, no, you must not go before Elza comes. I have only the one comfortable carriage now. They have taken everything from me, my horses, my cattle, my carriages, and my motorcars⁠—I can’t send you to Cluj in comfort until Elza comes back in the carriage. I have another pair of horses⁠—but no comfortable carriage. They took everything away from me. Soon they will turn me out of this house⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Don’t worry about that, dear, my husband has the use of a small car and a soldier-chauffeur. We can get to Cluj all right.”</p>
			<p>The sister in charge interposed again, more peremptorily this time. Rosemary took as cheerful a farewell of the invalid as she could.</p>
			<p>“You must arrange,” she said, “As soon as you are well enough, to come over to us in England for a visit. It would be such a change for you, and Jasper and I would make you and Elza very welcome.”</p>
			<p>But Maurus shook his head, and stared straight out before him. “That, dear Lady Tarkington,” he said, “can never be now.” And slowly the tears gathered in his eyes and trickled down his cheeks. Brokenhearted, Rosemary bade him a final good night.</p>
			<p>There was only one more chance of getting in touch with Elza tonight, and that was to ascertain if she were staying at any of the hotels in Cluj. And this Jasper did at Rosemary’s request. He telephoned to the “Pannonia” and to the “New York”, the only possible places where Elza might have put up for the night. True, when the Romanian Government took over the Imrey palace two or three rooms were allowed to remain in possession of the family if they required them, but it was not likely that Elza would elect to sleep under the same roof as General Naniescu. Both hotels replied on the telephone that the gracious Countess Imrey was not there. Ujlak, unfortunately, had not the telephone installed.</p>
			<p>There was, then, nothing to be done.</p>
			<p>But the next day was even more trying than the one before. The morning wore on and there was no news of Elza. Anxiety for her friend was added to the heavy load which Rosemary had to bear. Anxiety and this unexpected uncertainty, which was positive torture.</p>
			<p>Jasper, on the other hand, had become both helpful and sympathetic. Already the day before he had announced his intention of accompanying Rosemary to London. At first she had protested, but he looked so contrite and so abashed that she relented, and said more graciously:</p>
			<p>“It is more than kind of you, dear, to suggest it, but I really am quite capable of looking after myself.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t doubt it,” he had replied with a sigh, “but I, too, have certain privileges, chief of which is looking after your welfare⁠—and your safety.”</p>
			<p>She laughed. “I am perfectly safe. No one is going to run away with me.”</p>
			<p>“You might have trouble on the frontier.”</p>
			<p>“Not very likely,” she retorted, “with a British passport.”</p>
			<p>Jasper had made no further remark just then, and the subject was dropped. But Rosemary knew from his manner and his look that he intended to accompany her. It would be no use protesting, though she had the feeling that she would so much rather have travelled alone.</p>
			<p>But when the morning of the next day went by without news of Elza, Jasper was ready with a fresh suggestion. “Let me go to London for you,” he said. “I could see the editor of The Times and ask him in any case to withhold publication until he heard from you. Then after that, if Elza’s decision went the other way, you could always wire or write again.”</p>
			<p>Rosemary hesitated for a moment or two. She could not very well put into words the thought that was in her mind. But Jasper presently did it for her.</p>
			<p>“You do not trust me,” he said quietly.</p>
			<p>For another fraction of a second she hesitated, then with a frank gesture of camaraderie she put her hand out to him: “I think I ought to carry my own business through myself,” she said, and added softly: “You understand, dear, don’t you?”</p>
			<p>She could always win any man over with her smile, and at the soft tone of her voice Jasper captured her hand and buried his face in the soft, smooth palm.</p>
			<p>“Tell me how I can serve you,” he said, “but, in God’s name, don’t go away from me.”</p>
			<p>He was once more all kindness and consideration, more like the charming companion of the early days of her brief married life. With utmost patience he discussed the whole situation with her: the possibility of getting in touch with Elza and the advisability of communicating with The Times in any case, leaving it open for an ultimate change of tactics.</p>
			<p>But though he was so kind, so unselfish, so generous, Rosemary could not respond in the same way as she had done in the past. Her confidence in him had been wavering for some time, whenever those wild outbursts of ungovernable passion, when he claimed her body and her soul as he would a slave or a chattel, had outraged as well as mystified her, and she could not free her mind from that vision which she had of him in the mirror yesterday, with his mouth parted in a cruel, wolfish grin. The dual nature in him puzzled her. She would not admit that she feared him, because she had never in her life been afraid of anyone, but she did own to a certain vague dread which would creep into her heart whenever she found herself alone with him; she had accepted his kisses at first, hoping that in time friendship and confidence would turn to warmer feeling, but she had a horror of them now, and knew that the last shred of friendship was being torn to rags by all that was violent, passionate and cruel in him. At the same time she did admit quite readily that he was very helpful and kind in the present emergency, and gladly did she accept his final offer to motor straightway to Cluj to see if he could find out something definite about Elza.</p>
			<p>“If she was not at Cluj,” he said, “I would go on to Ujlak; and, in any case, I can be back by about eight o’clock. If in the meanwhile, as I hope and think, Elza has turned up, we can make our plans in accordance with what she has decided, and either start for England at once, or leave matters as they stand.”</p>
			<p>The suggestion was so practical that Rosemary felt really grateful. She walked with him to the village where he garaged the car that Naniescu had leant him. It was a powerful little car, of a well-known French make and built for speed. The soldier-chauffeur was fortunately on the spot, and with a friendly handshake Rosemary wished her husband Godspeed.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know how I shall live through this day!” she said to him at the last.</p>
			<p>Jasper was very self-contained and practical. He satisfied himself that everything about the car was in order, then only did he get in. He took the wheel and waved Rosemary a last farewell, and very soon the car disappeared down the road in a cloud of dust.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
